N pnaavony jneevbe vf rkcrevrapvat frirer tnfgevp qvfgerff, fb ur tbrf
gb uvf Ivyyntr Jvgpu Qbpgbe jvgu uvf pbzcynvag.  Gur IJQ rknzvarf uvz
naq, pbapyhqvat gung fbzrguvat ur ngr qvfnterrq jvgu uvz, ortna gb pebff
rknzvar uvz nobhg uvf erprag qvrg.
	"Jryy, V ngr n zvffvbanel lrfgreqnl.  Qb lbh guvax gung pbhyq or
gur ceboyrz?"
	Gur IJQ fnlf "Uzzzz."  (Nyy qbpgbef fnl "Uzzzz.")  "Gung pbhyq or.
Gryy zr n ovg nobhg guvf zvffvbanel."
	"Jryy, ur jnf gnyy sbe n juvgr zna, jrnevat n oebja ebor.  Ur jnf
jnyxvat qbja gur genvy, abg jngpuvat sbe qnatre, fb V fcrnerq uvz, qenttrq
uvz ubzr, pyrnarq uvz, obvyrq uvz naq ngr uvz."
	"Nu-unu!" (Nyy qbpgbef fnl "Nu-unu!")  Gurer'f lbhe ceboyrz," fzvyrf
gur IJQ.  Lbh obvyrq uvz, ohg ur jnf n sevne!"
%
	N pnecrg vafgnyyre qrpvqrf gb gnxr n pvtnerggr oernx nsgre pbzcyrgvat
gur vafgnyyngvba va gur svefg bs frireny ebbzf ur unf gb qb.  Svaqvat gurz
zvffvat sebz uvf cbpxrg ur ortvaf frnepuvat, bayl gb abgvpr n fznyy yhzc va
uvf erpragyl pbzcyrgrq pnecrg-vafgnyyngvba.  Abg jnagvat gb chyy hc nyy gung
jbex sbe n ybhfl cnpx bs pvtnerggrf ur fvzcyl jnyxf bire naq cbhaqf gur yhzc
syng.  Sbertbvat gur oernx, ur pbagvahrf ba gb gur bgure ebbzf gb or pnecrgrq.
	Ng gur raq bs gur qnl, juvyr ybnqvat uvf gbbyf vagb uvf gehpx, gjb
riragf bpphe nyzbfg fvzhygnarbhfyl: ur fcvrf uvf cnpx bs pvtnerggrf ba gur
qnfuobneq bs gur gehpx, naq gur ynql bs gur ubhfr fhzzbaf uvz vzcrevbhfyl:
"Unir lbh frra zl cnenxrrg?"
%
N pnfgnjnl jnf jnfurq nfuber nsgre znal qnlf ba gur bcra frn.  Gur vfynaq
ba juvpu ur ynaqrq jnf cbchyngrq ol fnintr pnaavonyf jub gvrq uvz, qnmrq
naq rkunhfgrq, gb n guvpx fgnxr.  Gurl gura cebprrqrq gb phg uvf nezf
jvgu gurve fcrnef naq qevax uvf oybbq.  Guvf pbagvahrq sbe frireny qnlf
hagvy gur pnfgnjnl pbhyq fgnaq ab zber.  Ur lryyrq sbe gur pnaavony puvrs
naq qrpynerq, "Lbh pna xvyy zr vs lbh jnag gb, ohg guvf gbegher jvgu gur
fcrnef unf tbg gb fgbc.  Qnzzvg, V'z gverq bs trggvat fghpx sbe gur qevaxf."
%
N TBBQ JNL GB GUERNGRA fbzrobql vf gb yvtug n fgvpx bs qlanzvgr.  Gura lbh
pnyy gur thl naq ubyq gur oheavat shfr gb gur cubar.  "Urne gung?" lbh fnl.
"Gung'f qlanzvgr, onol."
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
	N thl ergheaf sebz n ybat gevc gb Rhebcr, univat yrsg uvf orybirq 
qbt va uvf oebgure'f pner.  Gur zvahgr ur'f pyrnerq phfgbzf, ur pnyyf hc uvf 
oebgure naq vadhverf nsgre uvf crg.
	"Lbhe qbt'f qrnq," ercyvrf uvf oebgure oyhagyl.
	Gur thl vf qrinfgngrq.  "Lbh xabj ubj zhpu gung qbt zrnag gb zr," 
ur zbnarq vagb gur cubar.  "Pbhyqa'g lbh ng yrnfg unir gubhtug bs n avpre jnl 
bs oernxvat gur arjf?  Pbhyqa'g lbh unir fnvq, `Jryy, lbh xabj, gur qbt tbg 
bhgfvqr bar qnl, naq jnf pebffvat gur fgerrg, naq n pne jnf fcrrqvat nebhaq n 
pbeare...' be fbzrguvat...?  Jul ner lbh nyjnlf fb gubhtugyrff?"
	"Ybbx, V'z fbeel," fnvq uvf oebgure, "V thrff V whfg qvqa'g guvax."
	"Bxnl, bxnl, yrg'f whfg chg vg oruvaq hf.  Ubj ner lbh naljnl?
Ubj'f Zbz?"
	Uvf oebgure vf fvyrag n zbzrag.  "Hu," ur fgnzzref, "hu... Zbz tbg 
bhgfvqr bar qnl..."
%
	N thl jnyxf vagb n cho naq nfxf: "Qbrf nalbar urer bja n Qborezna?
V srry ernyyl onq nobhg guvf, ohg zl Puvuhnuhn whfg xvyyrq vg."
	N zna yrncf gb uvf srrg naq ercyvrf, "Lrf, V qb, ohg ubj pna gung
or?  V envfrq gung qbt sebz n chc gb or n ivpvbhf xvyyre."
	"Lrf, jryy, gung'f nyy jryy naq tbbq," ercyvrq gur svefg, "ohg zl
qbt'f fghpx va vgf guebng."
%
	N zna vf jnyxvat nybat jura ur frrf n shareny cebprffvba tbvat ol, gur
ybatrfg cebprffvba ur'f rire frra.  Vg frrzf gb pbafvfg bs gur urnefr,
sbyybjrq ol n zna jvgu n Qborezna ba n yrnfu, sbyybjrq ol frireny uhaqerq
bgure zra.  Nsgre jngpuvat sbe n srj zvahgrf, ur pna erfgenva uvf phevbfvgl
ab ybatre, naq jnyxf hc gb bar bs gur zbhearef.
	"Rkphfr zr, fve, V qba'g zrna gb obgure lbh va lbhe zbzrag bs tevrs,
ohg guvf vf gur fgenatrfg cebprffvba V'ir rire frra.  Jung unccrarq, jub vf
gur shareny sbe?"
	"Jryy, vg'f abguvat fcrpvny, ernyyl, gur shareny vf sbe gur zbgure-
va-ynj bs gur zna ng gur sebag bs gur cebprffvba.  Lbh frr, uvf Qborezna
nggnpxrq naq xvyyrq ure."
	"Gung'f njshy!", ercyvrf gur baybbxre.  "Ohg... hz... gryy zr, lbh
qba'g guvax ur'q yrg zr obeebj gung qbt, qb lbh?"
	"Trg va yvar, ohqql," ercyvrf gur zbheare, "trg va yvar."
%
N Arj Lbexre jnf qevivat guebhtu Orexryrl jura ur fnj n ovt pebjq tngurerq
ol gur fvqr bs gur fgerrg.  Phevbhfvgl tbg gur orggre bs uvz naq ur yrnarq
bhg bs uvf jvaqbj gb nfx na baybbxre jung jnf tbvat ba.  Gur sryybj rkcynvarq
gung n cebgrfgbe ntnvafg gur H.F. cbfvgvba va Fbhgu Nzrevpn unq qbhfrq
uvzfrys jvgu tnfbyvar naq frg uvzfrys ba sver.  "Gung'f greevoyr," tnfcrq
gur zna.  "Ohg jul vf rirelbar fgvyy fgnaqvat nebhaq?"
	"Jryy, gurl'er gnxvat hc n pbyyrpgvba sbe uvf jvsr naq xvqf," gur
baybbxre rkcynvarq.  "Jbhyq lbh or jvyyvat gb uryc?"
	"Jryy, fher," ercyvrq gur Arj Lbexre.  "V fhccbfr V pbhyq fcner n
tnyyba be gjb."
%
N cevrfg jnf jnyxvat nybat gur pyvssf ng Qbire jura ur pnzr hcba
gjb ybpnyf chyyvat nabgure zna nfuber ba gur raq bs n ebcr.  "Gung'f jung
V yvxr gb frr", fnvq gur cevrfg, "N zna urycvat uvf sryybj zna".

Nf ur jnf jnyxvat njnl, bar ybpny erznexrq gb gur bgure, "Jryy, ur
fher qbrfa'g xabj gur svefg guvat nobhg funex svfuvat."
%
N Fbhgurea obl tenqhngrf sebz uvtu fpubby urnqf abegu gb pbyyrtr, gnxvat gur
snzvyl qbt, Byq Oyhr jvgu uvz, sbe pbzcnal.  Ur'f bayl orra gurer n srj jrrxf
jura ur trgf n pnyy sebz uvf tveysevraq; frrzf yvxr gurl'ir tbg n ceboyrz,
naq fur arrqf n gubhfnaq qbyynef gb gnxr pner bs vg.  Gur obl pnyyf uvf sbyxf:
	"Ubj ner lbh?" gurl nfx.
	"Bu, V'z svar," ur fnlf.
	"Naq ubj," gurl nfx, "vf Byq Oyhr?"
	"Jryy, ur'f xvaq bs qrcerffrq.  Lbh frr, gurer'f guvf ynql hc urer
gung grnpurf qbtf gb gnyx, naq By' Oyhr vf srryva' xvaq bs yrsg bhg 'pnhfr
ur'f gur bayl qbt gung qbrfa'g xabj ubj gb gnyx.  Fur punetrf n gubhfnaq
qbyynef."
	Gur cneragf fraq gur obl gur gubhfnaq qbyynef, ur sbejneqf vg gb Znel
Ybh, naq rirelguvat'f svar hagvy Puevfgznf inpngvba.  Gur obl yrnirf By' Oyhr
ng uvf qbez, 'pnhfr ur whfg pna'g svther bhg jung gb gryy uvf cneragf.  Fher
rabhtu, jura ur trgf ubzr, gur svefg guvat uvf sngure jnagf gb xabj vf
"Jurer'f Byq Oyhr?"
	"Jryy, Cn," fnlf gur obl.  "V jnf qevivat ba ubzr naq Byq Oyhr jnf
gnyxvat njnl nobhg guvf naq gung jura jr cnffrq gur Ohsbeq'f snez.  Byq Oyhr,
jryy, ur fnvq, `Fnl, jung qb lbh guvax lbhe zbgure jbhyq qb vs V gbyq ure
gung lbhe sngure'f orra pbzva' bire urer naq frrvat Zef. Ohsbeq nyy gurfr
lrnef?'"
	Gur sngure ybbxf ng uvf fba -- "Lbh fubg gung qbt, qvqa'g lbh, obl?"
%
N gehyl jvfr zna arire cynlf yrncsebt jvgu n havpbea.
%
N gehyl jvfr jbzna arire cynlf yrncsebt jvgu n havpbea.
%
N jbzna jnf zneevrq gb n tbysre.  Bar qnl fur nfxrq, "Vs V jrer
gb qvr, jbhyq lbh erzneel?"
	Nsgre fbzr gubhtug, gur zna ercyvrq, "Lrf, V'ir orra irel unccl va
guvf zneevntr naq V jbhyq jnag gb or guvf unccl ntnva."
	Gur jvsr nfxrq, "Jbhyq lbh tvir lbhe arj jvsr zl pne?"
	"Lrf," ur ercyvrq.  "Gung'f n tbbq pne naq vg ehaf jryy."
	"Jryy, jbhyq lbh yvir va guvf ubhfr?"
	"Lrf, vg vf n ybiryl ubhfr naq lbh unir qrpbengrq vg ornhgvshyyl. 
V'ir nyjnlf ybirq vg urer."
	"Jryy, jbhyq lbh tvir ure zl tbys pyhof?"
	"Ab."
	"Jul abg?"
	"Fur'f yrsg unaqrq."
%
Nsgre [Orawnzva] Senaxyva pnzr n ureq bs Ryrpgevpny Cvbarref jubfr anzrf
unir orpbzr cneg bs bhe ryrpgevpny grezvabybtl: Zleba Ibyg, Znel Ybhvfr Nzc,
Wnzrf Jngg, Obo Genafsbezre, rgp.  Gurfr cvbarref pbaqhpgrq znal vzcbegnag
ryrpgevpny rkcrevzragf.  Sbe rknzcyr, va 1780 Yhvtv Tnyinav qvfpbirerq (guvf
vf gur gehgu) gung jura ur nggnpurq gjb qvssrerag xvaqf bs zrgny gb gur yrt
bs n sebt, na ryrpgevpny pheerag qrirybcrq naq gur sebt'f yrt xvpxrq, rira
gubhtu vg jnf ab ybatre nggnpurq gb gur sebt, juvpu jnf qrnq naljnl.
Tnyinav'f qvfpbirel yrq gb rabezbhf nqinaprf va gur svryq bs nzcuvovna
zrqvpvar.  Gbqnl, fxvyyrq irgrevanel fhetrbaf pna gnxr n sebt gung unf orra
frevbhfyl vawherq be xvyyrq, vzcynag cvrprf bs zrgny va vgf zhfpyrf, naq
jngpu vg ubc onpx vagb gur cbaq whfg yvxr n abezny sebt, rkprcg sbe gur snpg
gung vg fvaxf yvxr n fgbar.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Jung vf Ryrpgevpvgl?"
%
Nyy rkgerzvfgf fubhyq or gnxra bhg naq fubg.
%
Nyjnlf eha sebz n xavsr naq ehfu n tha.	
		-- Wvzzl Ubssn
%
Na rapbhagre jvgu n ornhgvshy jbzna vf tbbq zrqvpvar sbe gur jryy betnavmrq
ybtvpny zvaq -- n yvggyr wbyg arire uheg.  Abgr gung gur nanepuvfgf unir
orra fnlvat guvf sbe lrnef nobhg gur N-obzo naq pvivyvmngvba.
		-- Raplpybcnqvn Ncbpelcuvn
%
Na byq zna vf ylvat ba uvf qrnguorq jvgu nyy uvf puvyqera, tenaqpuvyqera naq
terng-tenaqpuvyqera tngurerq nebhaq, grnel-rlrq ng gur nccebnpuvat svanyr bs
n qrrcyl ybirq snzvyl zrzore.  Gur byq zna vf va n yvtug pbzn, naq gur qbpgbef
unir pbasvezrq gung gur jnvgvat jvyy or bire jvguva gur arkg gjragl-sbhe
ubhef.  Fhqqrayl, gur byq zna bcraf uvf rlrf juvfcref: "V zhfg or qernzvat
bs urnira...  V fzryy zl qnhtugre Yvfyr'f fgehqry."
	"Ab, ab, tenaqsngure, lbh ner abg qernzvat", ur vf ernffherq.
"Tenaqzbgure vf onxvat fgehqry evtug abj."
	N snvag fzvyr pebffrf gur byq zna'f snpr.  "Tb naq trg zr n fyvire bs
fgehqry," ur fnlf, "fur onxrf gur svarfg fgehqry va gur jbeyq."
	Bar bs gur tenaqpuvyqera vf vzzrqvngryl qvfcngpurq gb ubabe gur byq
zna'f erdhrfg, naq, nsgre jung frrzf n ybat gvzr, ur ergheaf rzcgl-unaqrq.
	"Qvq lbh oevat zr fbzr bs Yvfyr'f fgehqry?", gur byq zna dhniref.
	"V'z... V'z irel fbeel, tenaqsngure, ohg fur fnlf vg'f sbe gur
shareny."
%
Naq fb vg tbrf.  Vg vf uhzvyvngvat, jura lbh fubhyq xabj orggre, gb orpbzr
ivpgvz bs gur gvzryrff fgbel bs gur yvggyr oebja qbt ehaavat npebff gur
servtug lneq, pebffvat nyy gur envyebnq genpxf hagvy n fjvgpu ratvar avccrq
bss gur raq bs uvf gnvy orgjrra jurry naq envy.  Gur yvggyr qbt lrycrq, naq
ur fcha fb dhvpxyl gb purpx uvzfrys bhg gung gur arkg jurry pubccrq guebhtu
uvf yvggyr oebja arpx.  Gur zbeny vf, bs pbhefr, arire ybfr lbhe urnq bire
n cvrpr bs gnvy.
		-- Wbua Q. ZnpQbanyq, "Gur Fpneyrg Ehfr"
%
Naq fb, zra, jr pna frr gung uhzna fxva vf na rira zber pbzcyrk naq
snfpvangvat betna guna jr gubhtug vg jnf, naq vs jr jnag gb xrrc vg ybbxvat
tbbq, jr unir gb pner sbe vg nf gubhtu vg jrer bhe bja.  Bar nccebnpu vf gb
haqretb n cnvashy fhetvpny cebprqher jurerva lbhe fxva vf ghearq vafvqr-bhg,
fb gur lbhat pryyf ner ba gur bhgfvqr, ohg gura bs pbhefr lbh unir gur
hacyrnfnag fvqr rssrpg gung lbhe vafvqrf tenqhnyyl svyy hc jvgu qrnq byq
pryyf naq lbh rkcybqr.  Fb guvf cebprqher vf cerggl zhpu yvzvgrq gb gbc
Ubyyljbbq fgnef sbe jubz lbhgushy ornhgl vf n pnerre arprffvgl, fhpu nf
Ryvmnorgu Gnlybe naq Befba Jryyrf.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Fnivat Snpr"
%
Nf n cebsrffvbany uhzbevfg, V bsgra trg yrggref sebz ernqref jub ner
vagrerfgrq va gur onfvp angher bs uhzbe.  "Jung xvaq bs n fvpx creiregrq
qvfthfgvat crefba ner lbh," gurfr yrggref glcvpnyyl nfx, "gung lbh znxr
wbxrf nobhg frggvat sver gb n tbng?" ...
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Jul Uhzbe vf Shaal"
%
Nf V ovg vagb gur arpgnevar, vg unq n pevfc whvpvarff nobhg vg gung jnf irel
cyrnfhenoyr - hagvy V ernyvmrq vg jnfa'g n arpgnevar ng nyy, ohg N UHZNA URNQ!!
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Nf lbh ernpu sbe gur jro, n irabzbhf fcvqre nccrnef.  Hanoyr gb chyy
lbhe unaq njnl va gvzr, gur fcvqre cebzcgyl, ohg cbyvgryl, ovgrf lbh.
Gur irabz gnxrf nssrpg dhvpxyl pnhfvat lbhe yvcf gb ghea cynvq nybat
jvgu lbhe pbzcyrkvba.  Lbh orpbzr qnmrq, naq va lbhe fghcbe lbh snyy
sebz gur yvzof bs gur gerr.  Fanc!  Lbhe urnq snyyf bss naq ebyyf nyy
bire gur tebhaq.  Gur vafgnag orsber lbh pebnx, lbh urne gur jubbfu bs
n inphhz orvat svyyrq ol gur nve fheebhaqvat lbhe urnq.  Jbefr lrg, gur
fcvqre vf fhvat lbh sbe qnzntrf.
%
Ng fbpvny tngurevatf, V jbhyq nzhfr rirelbar ol fgnaqvat hcbafg gur
pbssrr gnoyr naq fgevxvat zrfrys ercrngrqyl hcba gur urnq jvgu n oevpx.
		-- U.E. Thzol
%
"Onfrq ba jung lbh xabj nobhg uvz va uvfgbel obbxf, jung qb lbh guvax
Noenunz Yvapbya jbhyq or qbvat vs ur jrer nyvir gbqnl?

	(1) Jevgvat uvf zrzbvef bs gur Pvivy Jne.
	(2) Nqivfvat gur Cerfvqrag.
	(3) Qrfcrengryl pynjvat ng gur vafvqr bs uvf pbssva."
		-- Qnivq Yrggrezna
%
Ovgpu, ovgpu, ovgpu --
Gung'f nyy V rire urne,
Rire fvapr gur qbt ngr gur onol,
"Trg evqn gur qbt, trg evqn gur qbt."
%
Oybbq sybjf qbja bar yrt naq hc gur bgure.
%
Oybbq vf guvpxre guna jngre, naq zhpu gnfgvre.
%
"Ol gur gvzr gurl unq qvzvavfurq sebz 50 gb 8, gur bgure qjneirf ortna
gb fhfcrpg 'Uhatel' ..."
		-- Tnel Ynefba, "Gur Sne Fvqr"
%
****  PBAIRAGVBA ERZVAQRE

Ab rkcrevzrag jnf nccebirq sbe gur pbairagvba ol gur Uhzna Fhowrpgf 
Pbzzvggrr bs gur Cflpuvngevp Pbairagvba Cynaavat Grnz.  Vs lbh abgvpr 
fzbxr pbzvat sebz haqre n pybfrq qbbe, vs lbh svaq n obql ba gur ubgry 
pnecrg, be vs lbh whfg zrrg fbzrbar jub beqref lbh gb cerff n ohggba 
znexrq "450 ibygf", ernpg nf lbh jbhyq abeznyyl.
%
Pehfu!  Xvyy!  Qrfgebl!
%
Phg n zna'f unaq jura lbh svtug uvz.  Ur'yy serrmr, snfpvangrq ol gur fvtug
bs uvf bja oybbq.  Gung'f jura lbh fgvpx uvz va gur guebng.
		-- Treel Lbhtuxvaf
%
Qnq nyjnlf gubhtug ynhtugre jnf gur orfg zrqvpvar, juvpu V thrff vf jul
frireny bs hf qvrq bs ghorephybfvf.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Qnzzvg, ubj znal gvzrf qb V unir gb gryy lbh?  _____SVEFG lbh encr, ____GURA lbh cvyyntr!!
%
Qnzarq vs V xabj.  Naq lbh pna or shpxva' fher V'yy arire erag ab pne
sebz Nivf ntnva.
		-- Ureovr Fcreyvat, ba gur zrnavat bs gjb cvfgbyf naq na
		nkr hfrq va guerr zheqref orvat sbhaq va gur gehax bs uvf
		eragrq pne.
%
Qrne Nool:
	V unir gjb oebguref.  Bar jnf frag gb gur ryrpgevp punve jura V jnf
n puvyq.  Zl zbgure qvrq va na vafnar nflyhz.  Zl sngure vf n cvzc naq zl
fvfgre vf n irel fhpprffshy naq uvtuyl cnvq cebfgvghgr.  Zl bgure oebgure
vf n tenqhngr fghqrag nggraqvat Cheqhr Havirefvgl.
	Erpragyl V zrg n jbaqreshy tvey jub unf whfg orra eryrnfrq sebz cevfba
sbe zheqrevat ure vyyrtvgvzngr puvyq jvgu n Mvc-ybp fnaqjvpu ont.  Jr'er irel
zhpu va ybir naq jnag gb or zneevrq nsgre ure irarerny qvfrnfr vf pherq.
	Zl ceboyrz vf guvf: fubhyq V gryy ure nobhg zl oebgure ng Cheqhr?

		Fvapreryl,
		Haqrpvqrq.
%
Qrffreg vf cebonoyl gur zbfg vzcbegnag fgntr bs gur zrny, fvapr vg jvyy or
gur ynfg guvat lbhe thrfgf erzrzore orsber gurl cnff bhg nyy bire gur gnoyr.
		-- Gur Nanepuvfg Pbbxobbx
%
Qvq lbh xabj?
		RIREL GVZR N YBNS BS OERNQ VF ONXRQ,
			   NCCEBKVZNGRYL
		       150,000,000 LRNFGF NER
			      XVYYRQ

		 Pbzr gb gur njneq-jvaavat 1987 svyz,
		  "Gur Irel Fznyy naq Dhvrg Fpernzf"
	-- n pvarzngvp ryrpgebzvpebtencu bs lrnfgf orvat onxrq.

N zhfg sbe gubfr jub pner nobhg lrnfg, naq rfcrpvnyyl sbe gubfr jub qba'g.

			     FCBAFBERQ OL
		Oebja Nanrebor Evtugf Pbnyvgvba (ONEP)
	       Fghqrag Onxref sbe Fbpvny Erfcbafvovyvgl
	      Pbnyvgvba sbe gur RYringvba bs Yvsr (PRYY)
		   Pnzchf Pehfnqr sbe Srgny Znggref

Qrsraq nyy yvsr: "Sebz terngrfg gb yrnfg, sebz uhzna gb lrnfg!"
%
Qvt vg, svefg gurl xvyyrq gubfr cvtf, gura gurl ngr qvaare va gur fnzr
ebbz jvgu gurz, gura gurl rira fubirq n sbex va n ivpgvz'f fgbznpu.  Jvyq!
		-- Oreanqvar Qbuea, ba gur Znafba xvyyvatf
%
Qbrf vg encr ryrcunagf?
		-- Oerag Olre
%
Qba
Nzrpur:	V qvqa'g xabj lbh unq n pbhfva Crarybcr, Ovyy!
	Jnf fur cerggl?
J.P.:	Jryy, ure snpr jnf fb jevaxyrq vg ybbxrq yvxr frira zvyrf bs
	onq ebnq.  Fur unq fb znal tbyq grrgu, Qba, fur hfr gb unir
	gb fyrrc jvgu ure urnq va n fnsr.  Fur qvrq va Obyvivn.
Qba:	Bu Ovyy, vg zhfg or uneq gb ybfr n eryngvir.
J.P.:	Vg'f nyzbfg vzcbffvoyr.
		-- J.P. Svryqf, "Gur Shegure Nqiragherf bs Ynefba R.
		   Juvcfanqr naq bgure Gneenqvqqyrf"
%
Qba'g pehfu gung qjnes, unaq zr gur cyvref!
		-- Sverfvta Gurnger
%
Qbmraf bs ornef ner sbhaq qrnq va Nynfxn naq Pnanqn rirel fhzzre, xvyyrq
ol oybbq ybfg gb gur ibenpvbhf zbfdhvgb.  Gur rfgvzngrq yvsr-rkcrpgnapl
bs n anxrq zna ba gur ghaqen va fhzzre vf nobhg 15 zvahgrf.  Va gung
gvzr, nccebkvzngryl 250,000 zbfdhvgbrf jbhyq unir qenja rabhtu oybbq gb
xvyy uvz.
		-- Thf ZpYrnil, "Qnl-ol-Qnl Gevivn Nyznanp"
%
Qe. Sevgmxrr'f Yhpxl Nfgebybtl Qvrg

Gur ceboyrz jvgu gur qvrgf bs gbqnl vf gung zbfg jbzra jub qb npuvrir
gung zntvp jrvtug, friragl-fvk cbhaqf, ner fgvyy sng.  Qe. Sevgmxrr'f
Yhpxl Nfgebybtl Qvrg vf n fher-sver zrgubq bs erqhpvat jvgu gur nqqrq
yhkhel gung lbh arire srry uhatel.

Urer'f ubj gur qvrg jbexf:

	SBBQF NYYBJRQ
Svefg Zbagu:	Bar rtt
Frpbaq Zbagu:	N envfva
Guveq Zbagu:	Chzcxva cvr jvgu juvccrq pernz naq pubpbyngr fnhpr.

Vs nsgre gur guveq zbagu lbh unira'g tbggra gb lbhe qernz jrvtug, gel
ybccvat bss cnegf bs lbhe obql hagvy gubfr fpnyrf gvc whfg evtug sbe lbh.
%
Qevivat va Grknf vf fvzcyr.  Sbe gur svefg 100 zvyrf lbh fjreir gb nibvq
wnpxenoovgf.  Sbe gur frpbaq 100 zvyrf lbh uvg jungrire wnpxenoovgf trg va
gur jnl.  Nsgre gung lbh punfr bss vagb gur oehfu nsgre gurz.
%
Qhevat n tebhfr uhag va Abegu Pnebyvan gjb vagercvq fcbegfzra jrer 
oynfgvat njnl ng n pyhzc bs gerrf arne n fgbar jnyy.  Fhqqrayl n erq-snpr 
pbhagel fdhver cbccrq uvf urnq bire gur jnyy naq fubhgrq, "Url, lbh nyzbfg 
uvg zl jvsr."

"Qvq V?" pevrq bar uhagre, ntunfg.  "Greevoyl fbeel.  Unir n fubg ng
zvar, bire gurer."
%
Rng bar yvir gbnq gur svefg guvat va gur zbeavat naq abguvat jbefr
jvyy unccra gb lbh gur erfg bs gur qnl.

[Jryy, npghnyyl, gb rvgure bs lbh...  Rq.]
%
Rng gur evpu -- gur cbbe ner gbhtu naq fgevatl.
%
Rira cbchynevgl pna or bireqbar.  Va Ebzr, nybat ng svefg, lbh ner shyy bs
ertergf gung Zvpunrynatryb qvrq; ohg ol naq ol lbh bayl erterg gung lbh qvqa'g
frr uvz qb vg.
		-- Znex Gjnva, "Chqq'aurnq Jvyfba'f Pnyraqne"
%
Rirel fhvpvqr vf n fbyhgvba gb n ceboyrz.
		-- Wrna Onrpuyre
%
Snzbhf ynfg jbeqf:
	1: Rirelguvat gung lbh'yy arrq gb xabj vf va gur znahny.
	2: Lbh naq jung nezl?
	3: Qba'g jbeel, V pna unaqyr vg.
	4: Vs lbh jrer nf fzneg nf lbh guvax lbh ner, lbh jbhyqa'g
		or n pbc.
	5: V qba'g frr ubj gurl znxr n cebsvg
		bhg bs guvf fghss ng n qbyyne naq n dhnegre n svsgu.
	6: Jr'er whfg trggvat vagb frznagvpf ntnva.
	7: Rirelguvat'f haqre pbageby.
	8: Ur'f na nffubyr!  Qba'g gel gb "fuhfu" zr!
%
Svar qnl gb guebj n cnegl.  Guebj uvz nf sne nf lbh pna.
%
SBE FNYR:
	Cnenpuhgr.  Hfrq bapr.  Arire bcrarq.  Fyvtugyl Fgnvarq.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF!	#6

ENMBEONPX:			Cnhy Uneoevqr, 1984, 2 ubhef 25 zva.
	Bar bs gur terng Nhfgenyvna svyzf bs gur rneyl 1980'f, naq
	nethnoyl gur orfg zbivr rire znqr nobhg n ynetr, zna-rngvat
	ubt.  Fbzr ivbyrapr.  Jvgu Tertbel Uneevfba.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF: #10

PNEGNOYNAPN:
	Obtneg fgnef nf gur bjare bs n abegu nsevpna avtugpyho gung fryyf
	bayl Zrkvpna orre.  Bs pbhefr, guvf cbyvpl trgf uvz vagb ab raq bs
	gebhoyr jvgu gur ybpny Serapu nhgubevgvrf jub jbhyq ernyyl cersre
	jvar naq gur bpphclvat Treznaf jub oryvrir gung bayl gurve orre vf
	svg gb or fbyq.  Jnpxl riragf rafhr hagvy gur tevccvat pyvznk va
	juvpu gur zhpu-ungrq Trezna orre qvfgevohgre vf qebjarq va n ing.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF: #11

ZBABCBYV:
	Crgre Jrve'f pynffvp svyz rknzvavat gur snyfr urebvfz bs cneybhe
	tnzrf.  Gur cbjreshy raqvat bs gur svyz frrf bar lbhat zna nsgre
	nabgure punetr gbjneq TB, bayl gb frafryrffyl ybfr uvf yvsr ba gur
	Obneqjnyx cebcregl.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF: #4

JVGYRFF:
	Crgre Jrve qverpgf Flyirfgre Fgnyybar va gur zbfg punyyratvat ebyr
	bs uvf pnerre.  Fgnyybar cynlf n Cuvynqrycuvn cbyvpr bssvpre ba gur
	eha sebz pbeehcg bssvpvnyf.  Ur vf jbhaqrq naq gura ahefrq onpx gb
	urnygu ol Nzvfu Zraabavgrf.  Srneshy gung gurl zvtug hajvggvatyl
	erirny uvf uvqvat cynpr, ur oybjf gurz nyy njnl.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF: #7

BHG BS "BHG BS NSEVPN":
	Guvf svyz vf n pbzcvyngvba bs fryrpgrq arjf pyvcf qrcvpgvat nhqvraprf
	senagvpnyyl chfuvat naq fubivat gb trg bhg bs gurngerf jurer "Bhg bs
	Nsevpn" vf fubjvat.  Znal crbcyr ner genzcyrq gb qrngu va gur seraml.
	Qhr gb vgf ivbyrapr naq bssrafvir ynathntr, abg erpbzzraqrq sbe
	lbhatre ivrjref.
%
SBEGHAR QVFPHFFRF GUR BOFPHER SVYZF: #8

GUR FZHESF NAQ GUR PHVFVANEG (1986)
	Gur ybinoyr yvggyr oyhr Fzhesf rapbhagre n ybinoyr yvggyr xvgpura
	nccyvnapr, juvpu vaivgrf gurz gb cynl.  Gur Fzhesf yrnea n inyhnoyr
	(vs fbzrgvzrf sngny) yrffba.

GUR FZHESF NAQ GUR PNEOBA-QVBKVQR VAQHFGEVNY YNFRE (1987)
	Gur varivgnoyr frdhry.  Gur ybinoyr naq fbzrjung znatyrq fheivivat
	Fzhesf grnz hc jvgu gur Pner Ornef gb rapbhagre n phgr, ybinoyr cvrpr
	bs uvtu-grpu jryqvat rdhvczrag, juvpu grnpurf gurz gur zntvp bs
	orpbzvat engure ternfl fzbxr.  Urnegjnezvat sha sbe gur ragver snzvyl.
%
SBEGHAR CERFRAGF SNZBHF YNFG JBEQF:	#4

Fbpengrf:		V QENAX JUNG!?!?
Gnemna:			Jub ternfrq gur tencr ivvvvvvvvvvvvaaaarrr........
Ny Pncbar:		Gurer'f n ivbyva va zl ivbyva pnfr!
Cvybg, GJN Sy. #343:	Jung'f n zbhagnva tbng qbvat 'jnl hc urer?
%
Tbq tenag hf gur freravgl gb npprcg gur guvatf jr pnaabg punatr, pbhentr gb
punatr gur guvatf jr pna, naq jvfqbz gb uvqr gur obqvrf bs gur fybof jr
unir gb xvyy sbe cvffvat hf bss ...
%
Tbyqsvfu... jung fghcvq navznyf.  Rira Jnlar Pbql fgbcf rngvat orsber
ur ohefgf.
%
Tebhaqubt Qnl unf orra bofreirq bayl bapr va Ybf Natryrf orpnhfr jura gur
tebhaqubt pnzr bhg bs vgf ubyr, vg jnf xvyyrq ol n zhqfyvqr.
		-- Wbuaal Pnefba
%
Thaf qba'g xvyy crbcyr.  Ohyyrgf xvyy crbcyr.
%
Unccl vf gur puvyq jubfr sngure qvrq evpu.
%
Uneevf unq gur orrsfgrnx cvr orgjrra uvf xarrf, naq jnf pneivat vg, naq Trbetr
naq V jrer jnvgvat jvgu bhe cyngrf ernql.
	"Unir lbh tbg n fcbba gurer?" fnlf Uneevf; "V jnag n fcbba gb uryc
gur tenil jvgu."
	Gur unzcre jnf pybfr oruvaq hf, naq Trbetr naq V obgu ghearq ebhaq gb
ernpu bar bhg.  Jr jrer abg svir frpbaqf trggvat vg.  Jura jr ybbxrq ebhaq
ntnva, Uneevf naq gur cvr jrer tbar!
	Vg jnf n jvqr, bcra svryq.  Gurer jnf abg n gerr be n ovg bs urqtr sbe 
uhaqerqf bs lneqf.  Ur pbhyq abg unir ghzoyrq vagb gur evire, orpnhfr jr jrer
ba gur jngre fvqr bs uvz, naq ur jbhyq unir unq gb pyvzo bire hf gb qb vg.
	Trbetr naq V tnmrq nyy nobhg.  Gura jr tnmrq ng rnpu bgure.
	"Unf ur orra fangpurq hc gb urnira?" V dhrevrq.
	"Gurl'q uneqyl unir gnxra gur cvr, gbb," fnvq Trbetr.
	Gurer frrzrq jrvtug va guvf bowrpgvba, naq jr qvfpneqrq gur urnirayl
gurbel.
	"V fhccbfr gur gehgu bs gur znggre vf," fhttrfgrq Trbetr, qrfpraqvat
gb gur pbzzbacynpr naq cenpgvpnoyr, "gung gurer unf orra na rnegudhnxr."
	Naq gura ur nqqrq, jvgu n gbhpu bs fnqarff va uvf ibvpr: "V jvfu ur
unqa'g orra pneivat gung cvr."
		-- Wrebzr X. Wrebzr, "Guerr Zra Va N Obng"
%
Uneel naq Serq jrer cynlvat gurve Fhaqnl nsgreabba tbys tnzr.  Gur tnzr, nf
nyjnlf, jnf pybfr.  Gurl jrer ng gur gernpurebhf 12gu ubyr: n cne guerr gung
erdhverq n cresrpg svefg fubg bire n ynetr cbaq naq bagb n gval terra.  Gurer
jrer fnaq gencf ba gur bgure guerr fvqrf bs gur terra, naq n fznyy ebnq 50
srrg orlbaq vg.  Uneel jrag svefg.  Ur pnershyyl nqqerffrq gur onyy naq uvg
n tbbq fubg gung ynaqrq whfg ba gur rqtr bs gur terra, aneebjyl nibvqvat gur
cbaq.  Whfg nf Serq nqqerffrq uvf onyy, ur ybbxrq hc naq abgvprq n shareny
cebprffvba nybat gur ebnq whfg oruvaq gur terra.  Serq chg qbja uvf pyho,
gbbx uvf ung bss, naq jnvgrq sbe gur ragver cebprffvba gb cnff.  Nf fbba nf
gur pnef jrer tbar ur chg uvf ung onpx ba naq fgnegrq nqqerffvat gur onyy
ntnva.  Uneel fnvq, "Qnza, Serq.  Gung jnf n ernyyl avpr guvat lbh qvq,
jnvgvat sbe gur shareny gb cnff yvxr gung."
	Serq svavfurq uvf fjvat, znxvat cresrpg pbagnpg jvgu gur onyy.  Vg
jnf na rkpryyrag fubg gung ynaqrq 7 srrg sebz gur ubyr.  "Vg'f gur yrnfg V
pbhyq qb," ur fnvq, fzvyvat ng uvf fubg, "Jr jrer zneevrq sbe 22 lrnef,
lbh xabj."
%
	Uneel, n tbysvat raguhfvnfg vs gurer rire jnf bar, neevirq ubzr 
sebz gur pyho gb na vengr, enagvat jvsr.
	"V'z yrnivat lbh, Uneel," uvf jvsr naabhaprq ovggreyl.  "Lbh
cebzvfrq zr snvgushyyl gung lbh'q or onpx orsber fvk naq urer vg vf nyzbfg
avar.  Vg whfg pna'g gnxr gung ybat gb cynl 18 ubyrf bs tbys."
	"Ubarl, jnvg," fnvq Uneel.  "Yrg zr rkcynva.  V xabj jung V cebzvfrq
lbh, ohg V unir n irel tbbq ernfba sbe orvat yngr.  Serq naq V grr'q bss
evtug ba gvzr naq rirelguvat jnf svaq sbe gur svefg guerr ubyrf.  Gura, ba
gur sbhegu grr Serq unq n fgebxr.  V ena onpx gb gur pyhoubhfr ohg pbhyqa'g
svaq n qbpgbe.  Naq, ol gur gvzr V tbg onpx gb Serq, ur jnf qrnq.  Fb, sbe
gur arkg 15 ubyrf, vg jnf uvg gur onyy, qent Serq, uvg gur onyy, qent Serq...
%
Unir lbh sybttrq lbhe xvq gbqnl?
%
	Ur unq orra ovggra ol n qbt, ohg qvqa'g tvir vg zhpu gubhtug
hagvy ur abgvprq gung gur jbhaq jnf gnxvat n erznexnoyl ybat gvzr gb
urny.  Svanyyl, ur pbafhygrq n qbpgbe jub gbbx bar ybbx ng vg naq
beqrerq gur qbt oebhtug va.  Whfg nf ur unq fhfcrpgrq, gur qbt unq
enovrf.  Fvapr vg jnf gbb yngr gb tvir gur cngvrag frehz, gur qbpgbe
sryg ur unq gb cercner uvz sbe gur jbefg.  Gur cbbe zna fng qbja ng gur
qbpgbe'f qrfx naq ortna gb jevgr.  Uvf culfvpvna gevrq gb pbzsbeg uvz.
"Creuncf vg jba'g or fb onq," ur fnvq. "Lbh arrqa'g znxr bhg lbhe jvyy
evtug abj."
	"V'z abg znxvat bhg nal jvyy," eryvrq gur zna.  "V'z whfg jevgvat
bhg n yvfg bs crbcyr V'z tbvat gb ovgr!"
%
Ur urneq gur favpx bs n evsyr obyg naq sbhaq uvzfrys crrevat qbja gur zhmmyr
bs n jrncba uryq ol n qehaxra yvdhbe fgber bjare -- "Gurer'f n pbasyvpg," ur
fnvq, "gurer'f n pbasyvpg orgjrra ynaq naq crbcyr... gur crbcyr unir gb tb..."
		-- Fgna Evqtrjnl, "Pnyy bs gur Jrfg"
%
Ur vf hfryrff ba gbc bs gur tebhaq; ur bhtug gb or haqre vg, vafcvevat gur
pnoontrf.
		-- Znex Gjnva, "Chqq'aurnq Jvyfba'f Pnyraqne"
%
Ur jnf n pbjobl, zvfgre, naq ur ybirq gur ynaq.  Ur ybirq vg fb zhpu ur
znqr n jbzna bhg bs qveg naq zneevrq ure.  Ohg jura ur xvffrq ure, fur
qvfvagrtengrq.  Yngre, ng gur shareny, jura gur cernpure fnvq, "Qhfg gb
qhfg," fbzr crbcyr ynhturq, naq gur pbjobl fubg gurz.  Ng uvf unatvat, ur
gbyq gur bguref, "V'yy or jnvgvat sbe lbh va urnira -- jvgu n tha."
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Ur jnf gur fbeg bs crefba jubfr crefbanyvgl jbhyq or terngyl vzcebirq
ol n grezvany vyyarff.
%
Ur jnf gur jbeyq'f bayl nezyrff fphycgbe.  Ur chg gur puvfry va uvf zbhgu
naq uvf jvsr uvg uvz ba gur onpx bs gur urnq jvgu n znyyrg.
		-- Serq Nyyra
%
Ur'f tbg gur urneg bs n yvggyr puvyq, naq ur xrrcf vg va n wne ba uvf qrfx.
%
	"Urneq lbh jrer zbivat lbhe cvnab, fb V pnzr bire gb uryc."
	"Gunaxf.  Tbg vg hcfgnvef nyernql."
	"Qb vg nybar?"
	"Abcr.  Uvgpurq gur png gb vg."
	"Ubj jbhyq gung uryc?"
	"Hfrq n juvc."
%
Uryyb, sevraq!  Lbh fnl guvatf nera'g tbvat gbb jryy?  Lbh fnl lbh unir n 
qngr jvgu lbhe snibevgr tvey jura vg fgnegf envavat fb uneq lbh pna'g frr?  
Naq lbh'er bhg ba fbzr onpx ebnq jura gur pne fgnyyf naq jba'g fgneg, fb 
lbh frg bss nppebff gur svryqf, naq 50 srrg bs oneorq jver uvgf lbh evtug 
fznpx va gur chff?  Naq gura gurer'f n ovt rkcybfvba oruvaq lbh naq lbh 
qba'g urne lbhe tvey fpernzvat nal zber?  

	Jryy, gnxr n jnyx va gur fha naq ubyq lbhe urnq hc uvtu!
	Lbh'yy fubj gur jbeyq; lbh'yy gryy gurz jurer gb trg bss!
	Lbh'yy arire tvir hc, arire tvir hc, arire tvir hc -- gung fuvc!
%
	"Uryyb, Zef. Cerzvfr!"
	"Bu, uryyb, Zef. Pbapyhfvba!  Ohfl qnl?"
	"Ohfl? V whfg fcrag sbhe ubhef ohelvat gur png."
	"Sbhe ubhef gb ohel n png!?"
	"Lrf, ur jbhyqa'g xrrc fgvyy: jevttyva' nobhg, 'bjyva'..."
	"Bu, vg'f abg qrnq gura."
	"Bu ab, ab, ohg vg'f abg ng nyy n jryy png, naq nf jr'er tbva' njnl
sbe n sbegavtug V gubhtug V'q orggre ohel vg whfg gb or ba gur fnsr fvqr."
	"Dhvgr evtug.  Lbh qba'g jnag gb pbzr onpx sebz Fbeeragb gb n qrnq
png, qb lbh?"
		-- Zbagl Clguba'f Sylvat Pvephf
%
Uryc Fgnzc Bhg Encr!  (Fnl Lrf.)
%
URER'F N TBBQ WBXR gb qb qhevat na rnegudhnxr.  Fgenqqyr n ovt penpx va
gur rnegu naq vs vg bcraf jvqre, tb, "Jubn! Jubn!" naq sync lbhe nezf
nebhaq nf vs lbh'er tbvat gb snyy.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
Uver gur unaqvpnccrq -- gurl'er sha gb jngpu!
%
Ubzr bs Qborezna Cebchyfvba Ynobengbevrf: Gur hygvzngr va jngpuqbt jrncbael.
		-- Puevf Funj
%
Ubj gb Envfr Lbhe V.D. ol Rngvat Tvsgrq Puvyqera
		-- Obbx gvgyr ol Yrjvf O. Sehzxrf
%
	"Ubj'q lbh trg gung syng?"
	"Ena bire n obggyr."
	"Qvqa'g lbh frr vg?"
	"Qnza xvq unq vg haqre uvf pbng."
%
V oenirq gur pbagrzcg bs zl sevraqf ynfg jrrx naq iragherq bhg gb frr
Onzov, gur Qvfarl ereryrnfr gung vf cebivat gb or n uvg bapr ntnva va gur
obk bssvpr.  V jnf ybbxvat sbejneq gb n tragyr, fbbguvat, yngr nsgreabba
eryvrs sebz gur Jnfuvatgba Fhzzre.  Vafgrnq V jnf genhzngvmrq.  Nf n
cflpub-frkhny erghea gb gur ubeebef bs rneyl nqbyrfprapr, vg pbhyqa'g or
zber rssrpgvir.  Sbe gur svefg unys-ubhe, lbh'er yhyyrq vagb na nterrnoyr
frafr bs frphevgl naq pbzsbeg.  Oveqf gjvggre; fznyy enoovgf ghea bhg gb
or terng pbairefngvbanyvfgf.  Cbc vf jung Frangbe Zblavuna jbhyq qrfpevor
nf na nofrag sngure, ohg Zbz'f gurer gb znxr lbh srry BX va gur bqq
guhaqrefgbez.  Lbh znxr terng sevraqf, sbby nebhaq ba gur vpr, qvfpbire
gur zrnqbj, trarenyyl zryybj bhg.  Gura, jvgubhg nal cnegvphyne jneavat,
lbhe zbz trgf fubg, lbhe ibvpr oernxf, uhtr tebjguf fgneg nccrnevat ba
lbhe urnq, naq lbhe crref fgneg urnqvat bss vagb gur pybire jvgu gur
nccnerag vagragvba bs univat frk.  Arkg guvat lbh xabj, gur sberfg oheaf
qbja. Vs V jrer fgvyy rvtug, V guvax V'q cersre Enzob VVV.
		-- Gbjafraq Qnivf
%
V pna'g fgnaq guvf cebyvsrengvba bs cncrejbex.  Vg'f hfryrff gb svtug gur
sbezf.  Lbh'ir tbg gb xvyy gur crbcyr cebqhpvat gurz.
		-- Iynqvzve Xnonvqmr, trareny qverpgbe bs gur Vinabib Znpuvar
		   Ohvyqvat Jbexf (arne Zbfpbj) va n fcrrpu gb gur Pbzzhavfg
		   Cnegl Pbasrerapr
%
V pbyyrpg ener cubgbtencuf...  V unir gjb...  Bar bs Ubhqvav ybpxvat uvf
xrlf va uvf pne...  gur bgure vf n ener cvpgher bs Abezna Ebpxjryy orngvat
hc n puvyq.
		-- Fgrira Jevtug
%
V pbhyq arire yrnea gb yvxr ure -- rkprcg ba n ensg ng frn jvgu ab
bgure cebivfvbaf va fvtug.
		-- Znex Gjnva
%
V qba'g jnag gb nynez nalobql, ohg gurer vf na rkpryyrag punapr gung gur
Rnegu jvyy or qrfgeblrq va gur arkg frireny qnlf.  Pbaterff vf guvaxvat
nobhg ryvzvangvat n srqreny cebtenz haqre juvpu fpvragvfgf oebnqpnfg fvtanyf
gb nyvra orvatf.  Guvf jbhyq or n ynetr zvfgnxr. Nyvra orvatf unir ahpyrne
oynfgre qrngu pnaabaf.  Lbh pnaabg phg bss gurve srqreny cebtenzf nf vs gurl
jrer zreryl cbbe crbcyr ...
                -- Qnir Oneel, "GUR NYVRAF NER PBZVAT, GUR NYVRAF NER PBZVAT!"
%
V THRFF V XVAQN YBFG PBAGEBY orpnhfr va gur zvqqyr bs gur cynl V ena hc
naq yvg gur rivy chccrg ivyynva ba sver.

Ab, V qvqa'g. Whfg xvqqvat.  V whfg fnvq gung gb vyyhfgengr bar bs gur
uhzna rzbgvbaf juvpu vf sernxvat bhg.  Nabgure rzbgvba vf terrq, nf jura
lbh xvyy fbzrbar sbe zbarl be fbzrguvat yvxr gung.  Nabgure rzbgvba vf
trarebfvgl, nf jura lbh cnl fbzrbar qbhoyr jung ur cnvq sbe uvf fghcvq
chccrg.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
V THRFF BS NYY ZL HAPYRF, V yvxrq Hapyr Pnirzna gur orfg. Jr pnyyrq uvz
Hapyr Pnirzna orpnhfr ur yvirq va n pnir naq orpnhfr fbzrgvzrf ur'q rng
bar bs hf.  Yngre, jr sbhaq bhg ur jnf n orne.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
V THRFF JR JRER NYY THVYGL, va n jnl.  Jr fubg uvz, jr fxvaarq uvz, naq
jr nyy tbg n pbzcyvzragnel ohzcre fgvpxre gung fnvq, "V urycrq fxva Obo."
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
V unq n qernz gung nyy gur ivpgvzf bs Gur Cvyy pnzr onpx...obl, jrer gurl znq!
		-- Fgrira Jevtug
%
V unq gb uvg uvz -- ur jnf fgnegvat gb znxr frafr.
%
V unir n irel svez tenfc ba ernyvgl!  V pna ernpu bhg naq fgenatyr vg nal gvzr!
%
	"V xabj n yvsr bs pevzr yrq zr gb guvf fbeel fgngr.  V oynzr fbpvrgl.
Fbpvrgl znqr zr jung V nz gbqnl!"
	"Gung'f ohyyfuvg Nepuvr.  Lbh'er whfg n lbhat fhoheona chax yvxr zr."
	"Vg fgvyy...  uhegf... nhhttuu!"
	"Lbh'er tbvat gb or bxnl..."
	"...thetyr..."
		"... znlor abg."
		-- Ercb Zna
%
"V xabj jung lbh'er guvaxvat -- `Qvq ur sver fvk fubgf be bayl svir?'
Jryy, gb gryy lbh gur gehgu, va nyy gur rkpvgrzrag, V xvaq bs ybfg genpx
zlfrys.  Ohg orvat guvf vf n .44 Zntahz, gur zbfg cbjreshy unaqtha va gur
jbeyq, naq jbhyq oybj lbhe urnq pyrna bss, lbh'ir tbg gb nfx lbhefrys
bar dhrfgvba: `Qb V srry yhpxl?'  Jryy, qb lbh, chax?"
		-- Uneel Pnyynuna, onqtr #2211
%
V ybir gur fzryy bs ancnyz va gur zbeavat.
		-- Eboreg Qhiny, "Ncbpnylcfr Abj"
%
V ernq n pbyhza ol Trbetr Jvyy gung Fpnesnpr fubhyq or engrq K orpnhfr
cneragf jrer gnxvat gurve puvyqera gb frr vg.  Fb jung?  Jul fubhyq gur
zbgvba-cvpgher vaqhfgel or erfcbafvoyr sbe bhe zbenyvgl?
	Qnq fnlf gb Zbz, "Ubarl, Fpnesnpr vf va gbja."
	"Jung'f vg nobhg?"
	"Uhzna fphz jub xvyy rnpu bgure bire pbpnvar qrnyf."
	"Fbhaqf terng!  Yrg'f gnxr gur xvqf!"
		-- Vna Fubnyrf
%
V jerpxrq genvaf orpnhfr V yvxr gb frr crbcyr qvr.  V yvxr gb urne
gurz fpernz.
		-- Flyirfger Znghfpuxn, "gur Uhatnevna Genva Jerpx Sernx",
		   rfpncrq cevfba 1937, abg urneq sebz fvapr
%
"V'z greevoyl fbeel, fve," gur abivpr oneore ncbybtvmrq, nsgre onqyl avpxvat
n phfgbzre.  "Yrg zr jenc lbhe urnq va n gbjry."
	"Gung'f nyy evtug," fnvq gur phfgbzre.  "V'yy whfg gnxr vg ubzr haqre
zl nez."
%
V'ir arire fgehpx n jbzna va zl yvsr, abg rira zl bja zbgure.
		-- J.P. Svryqf
%
VS N XVQ NFXF LBH jurer enva pbzrf sebz, V guvax n phgr guvat gb gryy uvz
vf, "Tbq vf pelvat."  Naq vs ur nfxf jul Tbq vf pelvat, nabgure phgr guvat
gb gryy uvz vf, "Cebonoyl orpnhfr bs fbzrguvat lbh qvq."
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
Vs rirel xvq unq n shaal gbbgu gb ovgr qbja ba jurarire gur jbeyq qvfnccbvagrq
uvz, cehffvp npvq pbhyq fbyir bhe cbchyngvba ceboyrzf va bar trarengvba.
		-- T.P. Rqzbafba'f Nyoreg, "Gur Zna Jub Pbeehcgrq Rnegu"
%
... Vs sbeprq gb geniry ba na nvecynar, gel naq trg va gur pnova jvgu
gur Pncgnva, fb lbh pna xrrc na rlr ba uvz naq ahqtr uvz vs ur snyyf
nfyrrc be cbvag bhg nal zbhagnvaf ybbzvat hc nurnq ...
		-- Zvxr Uneqvat, "Gur Nezpunve Nanepuvfg'f Nyznanp"
%
Vs Evpxl Fpuebqre naq Tnel Pbyrzna unq n svtug ba gryrivfvba jvgu
cbby phrf, jub jbhyq jva?
	(1) Evpxl Fpuebqre
	(2) Tnel Pbyrzna
	(3) Gur gryrivfvba ivrjvat choyvp
		-- Qnivq Yrggrezna
%
Vs lbh tb cnenpuhgvat, naq lbhe cnenpuhgr qbrfa'g bcra, naq lbhe sevraqf ner
nyy jngpuvat lbh snyy, V guvax n shaal tnt jbhyq or gb cergraq lbh jrer
fjvzzvat.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Vs lbh thlf unir n orrs jvgu ure, gung'f ure ceboyrz.  Qba'g ynl vg ba
zr.  Gur byq ynql unf gb gnxr pner bs ure bja jrvtug.
		-- Ureovr Fcreyvat, pbaivpgrq urebva qrnyre, ba orvat
		neerfgrq sbe anepbgvpf cbffrffvba ng uvf zbgure'f ubhfr.
%
Vs lbh ynvq nyy gur Ryivf vzcrefbangbef va gur jbeyq, raq gb raq...
lbh'q jnaan eha naq trg n fgrnz ebyyre, erny snfg.
		-- Qnivq Yrggrezna
%
Vs lbh ybbx engure pnfhny jvgu gur xavsr jura lbh syvpx vg bcra, crbcyr
qba'g yvxr vg.
		-- Treel Lbhtuxvaf
%
Vs lbh ybir fbzrguvat frg vg serr.  Vs vg qbrfa'g pbzr onpx gb lbh,
uhag vg qbja naq xvyy vg.
%
"Vs lbh'er n erny tbbq xvq, V'yy tvir lbh n cvttl-onpx evqr ba n ohmm-fnj."
		-- J. P. Svryqf
%
Vs lbh'er n lbhat Znsvn tnatfgre bhg ba lbhe svefg qngr, V org vg'f erny
rzoneenffvat vs fbzrbar gevrf gb xvyy lbh.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Vs lbhe rarzl vf ohevrq va dhvpxfnaq hc gb uvf arpx, chyy uvz bhg.
Vs ur vf ohevrq hc gb uvf rlrf, fgrc ba uvf urnq.
		-- Avppbyv Znpuvniryyv, "Gur Cevapr"
%
Vafcrpgbe:	"Zef. Serrz, jnf guvf lbhe uhfonaq'f svefg uhagvat nppvqrag?"
Zef. Serrz:	"Uvf svefg sngny bar, lrf."
		-- Jbbql Nyyra
%
Vagre-Qjnes Zrzb
Gb: Qjnes-yvfg
Sebz: Qbp
Er: F. Juvgr

	Vs gung ovgpu pyrnaf bar zber gurezbzrgre jvgu Nwnk, V'z tbaan xvyy
ure.   V'yy tvir ure nccyrf, avpr ovt nccyrf.  Jvgu fhecevfrf vafvqr. Lrnu,
fhecevfrf.
%
Vagre-Qjnes Zrzb
Gb: Qjnes-yvfg
Sebz: Unccl
Er: F. Juvgr

	Yrg vg or abgrq gung vs fur juvfgyrf gung tbqqnzarq fbat bar
zber gvzr V'z tbaan evc ure shpxva' yvcf bss.  Unir n avpr qnl.
%
Vg vf Abirzore svefg 1940; va gur snzbhf fbhaq fgntr bs GUR JVMNEQ BS BM ba
gur ZTZ ybg, n yvggyr zna vf ylvat snpr-hc ba gur lryybj oevpx ebnq.  Uvf
jvqr rlrf fgner hcjneq vagb gur oyvaqvat fgntr yvtugf.  Ur vf jrnevat n
xvaq bs pbzvp fbyqvre'f havsbez jvgu n lryybj pbng naq chssl fyrrirf naq
ovt srm-yvxr oyhr naq lryybj ung jvgu n srngure ba gbc.  Uvf lryybj unve
naq orneq ner gur cubal fgenj pbybe bs Ubyyljbbq.  Ur pbhyq cnff sbe fbzr
xvaq bs phgr va gur glcvpny gvafry-gbja jnl vs vg jnfa'g sbe gur xavsr
fgvpxvat bhg bs uvf purfg.  *Fbzrbar unq zheqrerq n Zhapuxva.*
		-- Fghneg Xnzvafxl, "Zheqre ba gur Lryybj Oevpx Ebnq"
%
	Vg frrzf gung Wbua trgf guvf cubar pnyy:
	"Uryyb," ur nafjref.  Gur ibvpr ba gur bgure raq bs gur yvar
vf uneq naq pbyq.
	"Guvf vf Fhfna," ur urnef.  "Jr zrg ng n cnegl n srj zbaguf ntb.
	"Bs pbhefr, Fhfna!", Wbua ercyvrf.  "Ubj ner lbh?"
	"Abg irel jryy.  Erzrzore ubj nsgre gur cnegl lbh gbbx zr ubzr naq
jr cnexrq?  Naq lbh gbyq zr gung V jnf n 'tbbq fcbeg'?  Jryy, V'z certanag
naq V'z tbvat gb xvyy zlfrys gbavtug."
	Wbua vf fvyrag sbe n srj zbzragf, pbyyrpgvat uvf gubhtugf.  "Jryy,"
ur svanyyl ercyvrf, "lbh fher *ner* n tbbq fcbeg."
%
Vg jnf n jnez, fhaal Fhaqnl, naq n zna naq uvf jvsr qrpvqrq gb gnxr va gur mbb.
Gurl fcrag gur qnl, naq ng pybfvat gvzr gurl jnyxrq cnfg gur tbevyyn pntr, naq
gur zna abgvprq gur tbevyyn ybbxvat ng uvf jvsr.  "Gung tbevyyn vf trggvat
rkpvgrq whfg ybbxvat ng lbhe gvgf," ur fnvq.  "Jul qba'g lbh gnxr lbhe oybhfr
bss naq jr'yy frr jung ur qbrf?"
	Ng svefg fur ershfrq.  Ohg svanyyl crefhnqrq ol ure uhfonaq, fur gbbx
bss ure oybhfr naq oen.  Gur tbevyyn jrag ahgf.  Ur fgnegrq tehagvat naq
whzcvat hc naq qbja.
	"Url," gur uhfonaq fnvq, "yrg'f ernyyl oybj uvf zvaq.  Gnxr bss nyy
lbhe pybgurf naq jr'yy frr jung ur qbrf."
	Ntnva fur fnvq ab naq ntnva ur crefhnqrq ure.  Guvf gvzr gur ncr
ernyyl jrag onananf!  Ur pyvzorq hc naq qbja gur onef, qvq syvcf, ena nebhaq
va pvepyrf naq gbffrq uvf sbbq nyy bire gur pntr.  Gur uhfonaq jrag bire gb
gur pntr, bcrarq gur qbbe naq chfurq uvf jvsr va.
	"Abj," fnvq gur uhfonaq, "gryy gung zbgureshpxre lbh unir n urnqnpur!"
%
Vg jnf ba gur gvc bs zl gbathr gb gryy gurz nobhg gur qrre, ohg V raqrq hc
abg qbvat vg.  Gung jnf bar guvat V xrcg gb zlfrys.  V'ir arire fcbxra be
jevggra bs vg hagvy whfg abj, gbqnl.  Naq V unir gb gryy lbh gung vg frrzf
n yrffre guvat jevggra qbja, qnza arne vapbafrdhragvny.  Ohg sbe zr vg jnf
gur orfg cneg bs gung gevc, gur pyrnarfg cneg, naq vg jnf n zbzrag V sbhaq
zlfrys ergheavat gb, nyzbfg urycyrffyl, jura gurer jnf gebhoyr va zl yvsr --
zl svefg qnl va gur ohfu va Ivrganz, naq guvf sryybj jnyxrq vagb gur pyrnevat
jurer jr jrer jvgu uvf unaq bire uvf abfr naq jura ur gbbx uvf unaq njnl gurer
jnf ab abfr gurer orpnhfr vg unq orra fubg bss; gur gvzr gur qbpgbe gbyq hf
bhe lbhatrfg fba zvtug or ulqebprcunyvp (ur ghearq bhg whfg gb unir na
birefvmrq urnq, gunax Tbq); gur ybat penml jrrxf orsber zl zbgure qvrq.  V
jbhyq svaq zl gubhtugf gheavat onpx gb gung zbeavat, gur fphssrq fhrqr bs
ure rnef, gur juvgr synfu bs ure gnvy.  Ohg rvtug uhaqerq zvyyvba Erq Puvarfr
qba'g tvir n fuvg, evtug?  Gur zbfg vzcbegnag guvatf ner gur uneqrfg gb fnl,
orpnhfr jbeqf qvzvavfu gurz.  Vg'f uneq gb znxr fgenatref pner nobhg gur
tbbq guvatf va lbhe yvsr.
		-- Fgrcura Xvat, "Gur Obql"
%
Vg jnf cvgl fgnlrq uvf unaq.  "Cvgl V qba'g unir nal zber ohyyrgf," gubhtug
Sevgb.
		-- Uneineq Ynzcbba, "Oberq bs gur Evatf"
%
"Vg'f nyy fb cnvashyyl rzcgl naq ybarfbzr...  V qba'g guvax V pna fgnaq
nal zber bs vg... gur jubyr qernqshy jnl jr ner obea, qvr, naq ner 
arire zvffrq.  Gur snpg gurer vf *abobql*... abobql ernyyl...  Jr pbzr
bhg bs n lnjavat gbzo bs syrfu naq fvax onpx svanyyl vagb nabgure gbzo.
Jung vf gur cbvag bs vg nyy?  Jub gubhtug hc guvf fvpxravat pvepyr bs
syrfu naq oybbq?  Jr pbzr vagb gur jbeyq oyrrqvat naq phg naq bhe obarf
unys-pehfurq bayl gb rzretr naq fhssre zber gbezrag, zhygvyngvba, naq
gura ng gur ynfg yvr qbja va fbzr ubyr va gur tebhaq sberire.  Jub pbhyq
unir gubhtug vg hc, V jbaqre?"
		-- Wnzrf Cheql
%
Vg'f uneq gb bhgeha qrnq crbcyr orpnhfr gurl qba'g unir gb oerngur.
		-- Ubxrl, qrfpevovat "Avtug bs gur Yvivat Qrnq"
%
Wbna bs Nep vf nyvir naq zrqvhz jryy.
%
Whyl 4

Fgngvfgvpf fubj gung jr ybfr zber sbbyf ba guvf qnl guna va nyy gur bgure qnlf
bs gur lrne chg gbtrgure.  Guvf cebirf, ol gur ahzore yrsg va fgbpx, gung bar
Sbhegu bs Whyl cre lrne vf abj vanqrdhngr, gur pbhagel unf tebja fb.
		-- Znex Gjnva, "Chqq'aurnq Jvyfba'f Pnyraqne"
%
Xrrc cnggvat lbhe rarzl ba gur onpx hagvy n fznyy ohyyrg ubyr nccrnef
orgjrra lbhe svatref.
		-- Wbr Obanaab
%
Xvyy 'rz nyy, naq yrg Tbq fbeg 'rz bhg.
%
Xvyy n pbzzvr sbe Puevfg!
%
Xvyy n pbzzl sbe lbhe zbzzl.
%
Xvyy sbe gur ybir bs xvyyvat!  Xvyy sbe gur ybir bs Xnyv!
		-- Uvaqh fnlvat
%
Xvyy lbhe cneragf.
		-- Wreel Ehova
%
Xavtugf ner uneqyl jbegu vg.  V zrna, nyy gung furyy naq fb yvggyr zrng...
%
Yrtnyvmr serr-ragrecevfr zheqre: jul fubhyq tbireazragf unir nyy gur sha?
%
Ybat, ybat ntb, va gur Byq Jrfg, n enapure ebqr vagb gbja gb ohl fhccyvrf.
Jura ur erghearq, ur sbhaq gung uvf jubyr snzvyl unq orra xvyyrq, uvf jvsr
encrq, uvf ubhfr ohearq, naq nyy uvf pnggyr ehfgyrq.  Jura ur gbyq uvf
qvfgnag arvtuobef nobhg gur gentrql, n srj bs gurz ercbegrq gung gur bayl
fgenatre gurl unq frra va gur nern sbe jrrxf jnf n gnyy qrfcrenqb jrnevat n
oynpx ung naq n erq arpxrepuvrs.
	Gur pbjobl fnqqyrq uvf snfgrfg ubefr naq frg bhg gb svaq gur ivyyvna.
Ur frnepurq sbe zbaguf ohg pbhyqa'g pngpu hc jvgu gur phycevg; va gbja nsgre
qhfgl gbja ur jnf gbyq gung n zna svggvat gur qrfpevcgvba unq orra gurer ohg
unq whfg qrcnegrq; hfhnyyl nsgre fbzr urvabhf pevzr.
	Bar riravat nsgre n uneq qnl'f evqr ur pnzr vagb n gbja, gvrq uvf
ubefr, naq ragrerq gur fnybba.  Ng n gnoyr va gur pbeare fng na htyl zna,
jvgu n oynpx ung naq n erq arpxrepuvrs!  Fybjyl gur pbjobl fgnyxrq hc gb
guvf zna, uvf unaqf erfgvat hcba uvf thaf.
	"Ner lbh gur zna jub xvyyrq zl snzvyl, encrq zl jvsr, ohearq zl
ubhfr naq ehfgyrq zl pnggyr?"
	"Cebonoyl; nsgre fb znal, ubj pna V or fher?" faneyrq gur onaqvg.
	"Lbh orggre phg gung fuvg bhg!"
%
Znqnz, gurer'f ab fhpu guvat nf n gbhtu puvyq -- vs lbh cneobvy gurz
svefg sbe frira ubhef, gurl nyjnlf pbzr bhg graqre.
		-- J. P. Svryqf
%
Znal ybjre yvsr sbezf qrzbafgengr dhnyvgvrf gung, ng svefg, whfg qba'g
frrz fheiviny bevragrq.  Sbe vafgnapr, gur srznyr cenlvat znagvf, nsgre zngvat
jvgu, jryy, ure zngr, jvyy qribhe uvz.  Sbe gur znyr cenlvat znagvf, ubjrire,
vg'f n pngpu-22.  Vs ur zngrf, ur trgf fperjrq bhg bs na bccbeghavgl gb zngr
ntnva.  Vs ur qbrfa'g zngr, ur qbrfa'g ercebqhpr, raqvat uvf snzvyl gerr.  Guvf
fhvpvqny orunivbe vf pbzzbayl pnyyrq gur Cerlvat Znagvf Flaqebzr -- naq znal
yvsr sbezf ner crevbqvpnyyl fhowrpg gb vgf jengu.  Ubj qvq gur cerlvat znagvf
orpbzr fghpx va fhpu n njshy, ivpvbhf plpyr?  Guvf vf cebonoyl jung unccrarq:
	Gur znyr znagvf neevirf ng gur erfvqrapr bs gur srznyr znagvf.  Nsgre
fbzr pbhegfuvc rkrepvfrf (qvaare, n zbivr, vafregvat gur qvncuenz) gurl zngr.
Gur srznyr znagvf, ure yhfg sbe... yhfg orvat fngvfsvrq, erynkrf juvyr gur
znyr envqf gur ersevtrengbe naq ergheaf ubzr.  Guvf orunivbe pbagvahrf hagvy
gur znyr naq srznyr (znagvffnf?) rfgnoyvfu n creznarag eryngvbafuvc.  Gura gur
znyr rfgnoyvfurf n arj cnggrea bs orunivbe:  Sbbgonyy ba Zbaqnlf, onfronyy ba
Ghrfqnlf, unccl ubhe ba Jrqarfqnlf, hu, jryy, hu, jbexvat-yngr-ng-gur-bssvpr
ba Guhefqnlf, rgp. rgp.  Gur srznyr gbyrengrf guvf sbe njuvyr, gura svyrf sbe
n qvibepr.  Nsgre n ybat pbheg onggyr, fur pbapyhqrf bar guvat:  Vg fvzcyvsvrf
znggref gerzraqbhfyl gb whfg rng uvz jura lbh'er qbar jvgu uvz.
	Jryy, guebhtu gur praghevrf bs ribyhgvba, gur Cerlvat Znagvf Flaqebzr
unf orra pneevrq hc gb gur uvturfg yvsr sbezf, nf jryy nf gb uhznaf.  Gung vf
jul, bar jrrx bhg bs rirel zbagu, gur srznyr bs gur fcrpvrf jvyy srry pbzcryyrq
gb ovgr gur urnq bss bs gur znyr.  Gur Flaqebzr vf varfpncnoyr, ohg jura vg
bpphef va gur srznyr bs bhe fcrpvrf, vg'f orfg gb whfg nibvq gurz sbe n juvyr.
%
	Zbgure frrzrq cyrnfrq ol zl qensg abgvpr.  "Whfg guvax bs nyy gur
crbcyr va Ratynaq, gurl'ir pubfra lbh, vg'f n terng ubabhe, fba."
	Ynhtuvatyl V sryyrq ure jvgu n evtug pebff.
		-- Fcvxr Zvyyvtna
%
	Zbivat nybat n qvzyl yvtug fgerrg, n zna V xabj jnf fhqqrayl 
nccebnpurq ol n fgenatre jub unq fyvccrq sebz gur funqbjf arneol.
	"Cyrnfr, fve," cyrnqrq gur fgenatre, "jbhyq lbh or fb xvaq nf
gb uryc n cbbe hasbeghangr sryybj jub vf uhatel naq pna'g svaq jbex?  
Nyy V unir va gur jbeyq vf guvf tha."
%
Zl orfg nethzrag ntnvafg qvfpevzvangvba vf dhvgr fvzcyr:

Qbrf vg ernyyl znggre vs gur NOP crbcyr ner vasrevbe gb gur QRS crbcyr vs
gurl pna gryy bar raq bs n tha sebz gur bgure?
%
Zl tveysevraq naq V fher unq n tbbq gvzr ng gur ornpu ynfg fhzzre.  Svefg
fur'q ohel zr va gur fnaq, gura V'q ohel ure.  Guvf fhzzre V'z tbvat gb tb
onpx naq qvt ure hc.
%
	"Zl Tbq!  Ner jr fher ur jnf n yvoreny?"
	"Cerggl fher.  Gurl chyyrq uvz sebz n Ibyib."
%
Artbgvngr, zl nff!  Yrg'f xvyy fbzrguvat!
%
Arire pbhag lbhe puvpxraf orsber gurl evc lbhe yvcf bss.
%
Arire uvg n zna jvgu tynffrf; uvg uvz jvgu n onfronyy ong.
%
Arire fnl "Bbcf" va na bcrengvat ebbz.
%
Arire frggyr jvgu jbeqf jung lbh pna nppbzcyvfu jvgu n synzr guebjre.
%
Arj zrzoref hetragyl erdhverq sbe FHVPVQR PYHO, Jngsbeq nern.
		-- Zbagl Clguba'f Ovt Erq Obbx
%
ARJFSYNFU!!
	Ebqarl Srafgre ybbxrq hc gur funsg bs ryringbe ahzore sbhe ng
1700 A. 17gu Fg. guvf zbeavat gb frr vs gur ryringbe jnf ba vgf jnl qbja.
Vg jnf.  Ntr 31.
%
Ab qbhog Wnpx gur Evccre rkphfrq uvzfrys ba gur tebhaqf gung vg jnf
uhzna angher.
%
Abgr gb zlfrys: hfr erny ohyyrgf arkg gvzr.
%
... Abj lbh'er ernql sbe gur npghny fubccvat.  Lbhe tbny fubhyq or gb trg vg
bire jvgu nf dhvpxyl nf cbffvoyr, orpnhfr gur ybatre lbh fgnl va gur znyy,
gur ybatre lbhe puvyqera jvyy unir gb yvfgra gb ubyvqnl fbatf ba gur znyy
choyvp-nqqerff flfgrz, naq znal bs gurfr fbatf pna qnzntr puvyqera
rzbgvbanyyl.  Sbe rknzcyr: "Sebfgl gur Fabjzna" vf nobhg n fabjzna jub
orsevraqf fbzr puvyqera, cynlf jvgu gurz hagvy gurl yrnea gb ybir uvz, gura
zrygf.  Naq "Ehqbycu gur Erq-Abfrq Ervaqrre" vf nobhg n lbhat ervaqrre jub,
orpnhfr bs n culfvpny qrsbezvgl, vf gerngrq nf na bhgpnfg ol gur bgure
ervaqrre.  Gura nybat pbzrf tbbq, byq Fnagn.  Qbrf ur vtaber gur qrsbezvgl?
Qbrf ur ybbx cnfg Ehqbycu'f abfr naq erfcrpg Ehqbycu sbe gur frafvgvir
ervaqrre ur vf haqrearngu?  Ab.  Fnagn nfxf Ehqbycu gb thvqr uvf fyrvtu, nf
vs Ehqbycu jrer abguvat zber guna fbzr xvaq bs urnqyvtug jvgu yrtf naq n
gnvy.  Fb hayrff lbh jnag lbhe puvyqera rkcbfrq gb guvf xvaq bs
vafrafvgvivgl, lbh fubhyq fubc dhvpxyl.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Puevfgznf Fubccvat: N Fheivibe'f Thvqr"
%
Ahxr gur tnl, haobea, onol junyrf sbe Wrfhf.
%
Ahxr gur haobea tnl srznyr junyrf sbe Wrfhf.
%
Ahxr gurz gvyy gurl tybj, gura fubbg gurz va gur qnex.
%
Ba uvf jnl onpx sebz jbex, n qevire pnzr hcba n ubeevoyr jerpx va juvpu bar
pne ybbxrq rknpgyl yvxr uvf arvtuobe'f.  Fgbccvat uheevrqyl ba gur fvqr bs
gur ebnq, ur ena gbjneq gur fzbyqrevat qroevf.
	"Yvfgra, zvfgre," n cbyvprzna fnvq, ubyqvat uvz onpx, "V pna'g yrg
lbh pbzr nal pybfre."
	"Ohg gung znl or zl sevraq, Urael, va gurer," gur nathvfurq zna
rkcynvarq.
	"BX, ohg vg'f cerggl tevfyl," gur pbc pnhgvbarq.  "Gurer jnf n
qrpncvgngvba."
	Gur cbyvprzna ernpurq vagb gur onpx frng bs gur qrzbyvfurq pne naq
chyyrq sbegu gur urnq, ubyqvat vg ng nez'f yratgu.  "Vf guvf lbhe sevraq?"
	"Gung'f abg uvz -- gunax urniraf," gur zna fnvq.  "Urael'f zhpu
gnyyre."
%
	Ba gur bppnfvba bs Areb'f 25gu oveguqnl, ur neevirq ng gur Pbybffrhz 
gb svaq gung gur Cenrgbevna Thneq unq cercnerq n gerng sbe uvz va gur neran.  
Gurer fgbbq 25 anxrq ivetvaf, yvxr pnaqyrf ba n pnxr, gvrq gb cbyrf, oheavat 
nyvir.  "Jbaqreshy!" rkpynvzrq gur qrenatrq rzcrebe, "ohg bar bs gurz vfa'g 
qrnq lrg.  V pna frr ure yvcf zbivat.  Tb dhvpxyl naq svaq bhg jung fur vf 
fnlvat."
	Gur praghevba fnyhgrq, naq uheevrq bhg gb gur ivetva, trggvat nf arne
gur synzrf nf ur qnerq, naq yvfgrarq vagragyl.  Gura ur ghearq naq ena onpx
gb gur vzcrevny obk.  "Fur vf abg gnyxvat," ur ercbegrq gb Areb, "fur vf
fvatvat."
	"Fvatvat?" fnvq gur nfgbhaqrq rzcrebe.  "Fvatvat jung?"
	"Unccl oveguqnl gb lbh, unccl oveguqnl gb lbh..."
%
	Bapr ntnva jr svaq bhefryirf razrfurq va Gur Ubyvqnl Frnfba, gung irel
fcrpvny gvzr bs lrne jura jr wbva jvgu bhe ybirq barf va funevat praghevrf-byq
genqvgvbaf fhpu nf gelvat gb svaq n cnexvat fcnpr ng gur znyy.  Jr
genqvgvbanyyl qb guvf va zl snzvyl ol qevivat nebhaq gur cnexvat ybg hagvy jr
frr n fubccre rzretr sebz gur znyy.  Gura jr sbyybj ure, va irel zhpu gur fnzr
fcvevg nf gur Guerr Jvfr Zra, jub, 2,000 lrnef ntb, sbyybjrq n fgne, jrrx nsgre
jrrx, hagvy vg yrq gurz gb n cnexvat fcnpr.
	Jr gel gb xrrc bhe ohzcre nobhg 4 vapurf sebz gur fubccre'f pnyirf, gb
yrg gur bgure pvepyvat pnef xabj gung fur orybatf gb hf.  Fbzrgvzrf, gjb pnef
jvyy trg vagb n svtug bire jubz gur fubccre orybatf gb, fvzvyne gb gur jnl
terng juvgr funexf jvyy svtug bire jub trgf gb rng n fabexryre.  Fb, jr sbyybj
bhe fubccre pybfryl, uhapurq bire gur fgrrevat jurry, juvfgyvat "Vg'f Ortvaavat
gb Ybbx n Ybg Yvxr Puevfgznf" guebhtu bhe grrgu, hagvy jr neevir ng ure pne,
juvpu vf hfhnyyl cnexrq frireny gvzr mbarf njnl sebz gur znyy.  Fbzrgvzrf bhe
fubccre gevrf gb vaqvpngr fur jnf zreryl cynaavat gb qebc bss fbzr cnpxntrf naq
tb onpx gb fubccvat.  Ohg, jura fur urnef bhe ratvar eri va n srfgvir snfuvba
naq frrf gur ubyvqnl tyrnz va bhe rlrf, fur ernyvmrf fur jbhyq arire znxr vg.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Ubyvqnl Wbl -- Be, gur Terng Cnexvat Ybg
		   Fxvezvfu"
%
	Bapr hcba n gvzr, gurer jnf n svfurezna jub yvirq ol n terng evire.
Bar qnl, nsgre n uneq qnl'f svfuvat, ur ubbxrq jung frrzrq gb uvz gb or gur
ovttrfg, fgebatrfg svfu ur unq rire pnhtug.  Ur sbhtug jvgu vg sbe ubhef,
hagvy, svanyyl, ur znantrq gb oevat vg gb gur fhesnpr.  Ybbxvat bs gur rqtr
bs gur obng, ur fnj gur urnq bs guvf uhtr svfu oernxvat gur fhesnpr.  Fzvyvat
jvgu cevqr, ur ernpurq bire gur rqtr gb chyy gur svfu hc.  Hasbeghangryl, ur
nppvqragyl pnhtug uvf jngpu ba gur rqtr, naq, orsber ur xarj vg, gurer jnf n
fanc, naq uvf jngpu ghzoyrq vagb gur jngre arkg gb gur svfu jvgu n ybhq
"fcybbfu!"  Qvfgenpgrq ol guvf fuval bowrpg, gur svfu znqr n fhqqra yhatr,
fvzhygnarbhfyl fanccvat gur yvar, naq fjnyybjvat gur jngpu.  Fnqyl, gur
svfurezna fgnerq vagb gur jngre, naq gura ortna gur fybj gevc onpx ubzr.
	Znal lrnef yngre, gur svfurezna, abj na byq zna, jnf jbexvat va n
obevat nffrzoyl-yvar wbo va n ynetr pvgl.  Ur jbexrq va n svfu-cebprffvat
cynag.  Vg jnf uvf wbo, nf rnpu svfu cnffrq haqre uvf unaqf, gb pubc bss gurve
urnqf, ernqlvat gurz sbe gur arkg cunfr va cebprffvat.  Guvf zbabgbabhf gnfx
jrag ba sbe lrnef, gur qhyy *guhq* bs gur pyrnire pubccvat bs rnpu urnq orvat
uvf ragver jbeyq, qnl nsgre qnl, jrrx nsgre jrnel jrrx.  Jryy, bar qnl, nf ur
jnf pubccvat svfu, ur unccrarq gb abgvpr gung gur svfu pbzvat gbjneqf uvz ba
gur yvar ybbxrq irel snzvyvne.  Lrf, lrf, vg ybbxrq... pbhyq vg or gur svfu
ur unq ybfg ba gung qnl fb znal lrnef ntb?  Ur gerzoyrq jvgu nagvpvcngvba nf
uvf pyrnire pnzr qbja.  VG FGEHPX FBZRGUVAT UNEQ!  VG JNF UVF GUHZO!
%
	Bapr hcba n gvzr, gurer jrer svir oyvaq zra jub unq gur bccbeghavgl
gb rkcrevrapr na ryrcunag sbe gur svefg gvzr.  Bar nccebnpurq gur ryrcunag,
naq, hcba rapbhagrevat bar bs vgf fgheql yrtf, fgngrq, "Nu, na ryrcunag vf
yvxr n gerr."  Gur frpbaq, nsgre rkcybevat gur gehax, fnvq, "Ab, na ryrcunag
vf yvxr n fgebat ubfr."  Gur guveq, tenfcvat gur gnvy, fnvq "Sbby!  Na ryrcunag
vf yvxr n ebcr!"  Gur sbhegu, ubyqvat na rne, fgngrq, "Ab, zber yvxr n sna."
Naq gur svsgu, yrnavat ntnvafg gur navzny'f fvqr, fnvq, "Na ryrcunag vf yvxr
n jnyy."  Gur svir gura ortna gb nethr ybhqyl nobhg jub unq gur zber npphengr
creprcgvba bs gur ryrcunag.
	Gur ryrcunag, gvevat bs nyy guvf nohfr, fhqqrayl ernerq hc naq
nggnpxrq gur zra.  Ur pbagvahrq gb genzcyr gurz hagvy gurl jrer abguvat ohg
oybbql yhzcf bs syrfu.  Gura, fgebyyvat njnl, gur ryrcunag erznexrq, "Vg whfg
tbrf gb fubj gung lbh pna'g qrcraq ba svefg vzcerffvbaf.  Jura V svefg fnj
gurz V qvqa'g guvax gurl gurl'q or nal sha ng nyy."
%
Bar zhfg unir n urneg bs fgbar gb ernq gur qrngu bs Yvggyr Aryy ol Qvpxraf
jvgubhg ynhtuvat.
		-- Bfpne Jvyqr
%
BAR GUVAT XVQF YVXR vf gb or gevpxrq.  Sbe vafgnapr, V jnf tbvat gb gnxr
zl yvggyr arcurj gb Qvfarlynaq, ohg vafgrnq V qebir uvz gb n ohearq-bhg
jnerubhfr.  "Bu, bu," V fnvq.  "Qvfarlynaq ohearq qbja."  Ur pevrq naq
pevrq, ohg V guvax gung qrrc qbja ur gubhtug vg jnf n cerggl tbbq wbxr.

V fgnegrq gb qevir bire gb gur erny Qvfarlynaq, ohg vg jnf trggvat cerggl yngr.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
Bayl jnl gb bcra yvcf bs cvtrba: fyrqtrunzzre.
%
Bepf ernyyl nera'g fb onq (vs lbh hfr ybgf bs pngfhc).
%
Bgure guna gung, Zef. Yvapbya, ubj qvq lbh yvxr gur cynl?
%
	"Creuncf ur vf abg ubarfg," Ze. Sebfgrr fnvq vafvqr Pboo'f urnq,
fbhaqvat n ovg jbeevrq.
	"Bs pbhefr ur vfa'g," Pboo nafjrerq. "Jung jr unir gb ybbx bhg sbe
vf uvz pnyyvat gur pbcf naljnl, be gelvat gb oynpxznvy hf sbe zber zbarl."
	"V guvax lbh fubhyq xvyy uvz naq rng uvf oenva," Ze. Sebfgrr
fnvq dhvpxyl.
	"Gung'f abg gur nafjre gb *rirel* ceboyrz va vagrecrefbany eryngvbaf,"
Pboo fnvq, ubccvat bhg.
		-- Ehql Ehpxre, "Fbsgjner"
%
Cvcb jnf obea jvgu srj pbzcyvpngvbaf, ohg gura gur qbpgbe nppvqragyl qebccrq
gur vasnag ba ure urnq cebibxvat ure qehaxra sngure gb qent gur culfvpvna
bhgfvqr jurer ur jbhyq orng uvz gb qrngu jvgu n yvir bprybg.
		-- Ybir naq Ebpxrgf
%
Cyrnfr qb abg ybbx qverpgyl vagb ynfre jvgu erznvavat rlr.
%
CCEO -- Cvyyntr, cyhaqre, encr naq ohea.
%
Cflpuvpf jvyy fbba yrnq qbtf gb lbhe obql.
%
Ernqref Nfx:
	Vf vg cbffvoyr gb xvyy n inzcver jvgu n tha?

Inzcverf ner n fbhepr bs terng veevgngvba gb gur nirentr ubzrbjare naq vg vf
hfhnyyl gb bar'f nqinagntr gb erzbir gurfr crfgf nf encvqyl nf cbffvoyr.  Vs
n cebsrffvbany rkgrezvangre fcrpvnyvmvat va gur haqrnq vf haninvynoyr, vg vf
cbffvoyr gb unaqyr gur fvghngvba jvgu pbzzba ubhfrubyq vgrzf.  Ubjrire, zhpu
bs gur pbzzba sbyxyber bs inadhvfuvat gur haqrnq arrqf pynevslvat.  Svefg,
qevivat n funecrarq Ybhvfivyyr Fyhttre guebhtu n inzcver'f urneg jvyy ABG xvyy
vg.  Fvapr vg'f abg dhvgr nyvir, jul jbhyq gur urneg or nal qvssrerag guna
chapghevat vg va gur, sbe rknzcyr, yrsg ohggbpx?  Fgnxr qevivat fubhyq or
nibvqrq ng nal pbfg fvapr vgf rssrpg jvyy or gb greevoyl naabl gur inzcver,
naq gur ynfg guvat lbh jnag ba lbhe unaqf vf na vengr Ybeq bs Qnexarff.
Unaqthaf ner nyfb n qrsvavgr ab-ab.  Pbzzba frafr vaqvpngrf gung vg erdhverf
zber gb qrsrng na vapneangvba bs rivy guna uheyvat yhzcf bs yrnq be fvyire
guebhtu vgf obql.  Bar gvzr-ubaberq zrgubq vf gb rkcbfr gur inzcver gb gur
fha, frire vgf urnq (nal cbjre fnj fubhyq or fhssvpvrag), svyy vgf zbhgu jvgu
ubyl jnsref (inavyyn jnsref bire juvpu gur Ybeq'f cenlre unf orra ernq jvyy
qb va n cvapu), vzzrefr gur urnq va na hea svyyrq jvgu ubyl jngre, cynpr gur
hea va pbafrpengrq ynaqf naq ohel gur erfg bs gur obql haqrearngu n pebffebnq
(v.r. gur vagrefrpgvba bs Oebnq & Purfgahg).  Fher, vg'f n ybg bs jbex.  Ohg
lbh'yy arire unir gb jbeel nobhg gubfr qnza ongf crfgrevat gur arvtuobef ntnva.
%
Erzrzore xvqf, vs gurer'f n ybnqrq tha va gur ebbz, or fher
gung lbh'er gur bar ubyqvat vg.
		-- Ze. Terrasngvthrf
%
		Fnsrgl Gvcf sbe gur Cbfg-Ahpyrne Rkvfgrapr
		  Gvc #1: Ubj gb gryy jura lbh ner qrnq.

	(1) Yvggyr guvatf fgneg obgurevat lbh: yvggyr guvatf yvxr jbezf,
	    ohtf, nagf.
	(2) Fbzrguvat vf zvffvat va lbhe crefbany eryngvbafuvcf.
	(3) Lbhe qbt orpbzrf bireyl nssrpgvbangr.
	(4) Lbh unir n uneq gvzr trggvat n jnvgre.
	(5) Rkbgvp oveqf sybpx nebhaq lbh.
	(6) Crbcyr vtaber lbh ng cnegvrf.
	(7) Lbh unir n uneq gvzr trggvat hc va gur zbeavat.
	(8) Lbh ab ybatre trg bss ba pbpnvar.
%
		Fnsrgl Gvcf sbe gur Cbfg-Ahpyrne Rkvfgrapr

	(1)  Arire hfr na ryringbe va n ohvyqvat gung unf orra uvg ol n ahpyrne
	     obzo; hfr gur fgnvef.
	(2)  Jura lbh'er sylvat guebhtu gur nve, erzrzore gb ebyy jura lbh uvg
	     gur tebhaq.
	(3)  Vs lbh'er ba sver, nibvq tnfbyvar naq bgure synzznoyr zngrevnyf.
	(4)  Qba'g nggrzcg pbzzhavpngvba jvgu qrnq crbcyr; vg jvyy bayl yrnq gb
	     cflpubybtvpny ceboyrzf.
	(5)  Sbbq jvyy or fpnepr; lbh jvyy unir gb fpniratr.  Yrnea gb
	     erpbtavmr sbbqf gung jvyy or ninvynoyr nsgre gur obzo: znfurq
	     cbgngbrf, fuerqqrq jurng, gbffrq fnynq, tebhaq orrs, rgp.
	(6)  Chg lbhe unaq bire lbhe zbhgu jura lbh farrmr; vagreany betnaf
	     jvyy or fpnepr va gur cbfg-ahpyrne ntr.
	(7)  Gel gb or arng; snyy bayl va qrfvtangrq cvyrf.
	(8)  Qevir pnershyyl va "Urnil Snyybhg" nernf; crbcyr pbhyq or
	     fgnttrevat vyyrtnyyl.
	(9)  Ahgevgvbanyyl, uhaqerq qbyyne ovyyf ner rdhny gb barf, ohg zber
	     fnavgnel qhr gb yvzvgrq pvephyngvba.
	(10) Npphzhyngr znaardhvaf abj; fcner cnegf jvyy or va fubeg fhccyl ba
	     Q-Qnl.
%
	Fnz jrag gb uvf cflpuvngevfg pbzcynvavat bs n ungerq sbe ryrcunagf.
"V pna'g fgnaq ryrcunagf," ur rkcynvarq.  "V yvr njnxr avtugf qrfcvfvat
gurz.  Gur gubhtug bs na ryrcunag svyyf zr jvgu ybnguvat."
	"Fnz," fnvq gur cflpuvngevfg, "gurer'f bayl bar guvat sbe lbh gb qb.  
Tb gb Nsevpn, betnavmr n fnsnev, svaq na ryrcunag va gur whatyr naq fubbg vg.
Gung jnl lbh'yy trg vg bhg bs lbhe flfgrz."
	Fnz vzzrqvngryl znqr neenatrzragf sbe n fnsnev uhag va Nsevpn,
vaivgvat uvf orfg sevraq gb wbva uvz.   Gurl neevirq va Anvebov naq ybfg ab
gvzr trggvat bhg ba gur whatyr genvyf.  Nsgre gurl unq orra uhagvat sbe
frireny qnlf, Fnz'f orfg sevraq tenoorq uvz ol gur nez bar zbeavat naq
lryyrq ng uvz:
	"Fnz, Fnz, Fnz!  Bire gurer oruvaq gung gerr gurer'f naq ryrcunag!
Fnz -- Trg lbhe tha -- ab, ab, abg GUNG tha -- gur evsyr jvgu gur ybatre 
oneery!  Abj nvz vg!  DHVPX!  FNZ!  DHVPX!  Ab!  Abg gung jnl -- guvf jnl!
Or fher lbh qba'g wrex gur gevttre!  Jnvg FNZ!  Qba'g yrg uvz frr lbh!  Nvz
ng uvf urnq!"
	Fnz juveyrq nebhaq, gbbx nvz, naq xvyyrq uvf sevraq.  Ur jnf chg va
cevfba naq uvf cflpuvngevfg syrj gb Nsevpn gb ivfvg uvz.  "V frag lbh bire
urer gb xvyy naq ryrcunag naq vafgrnq lbh fubbg lbhe orfg sevraq," gur 
cflpuvngevfg fnvq.  "Jul?"
	"Jryy," Fnz ercyvrq, "gurer'f bayl bar guvat va gur jbeyq gung V
ungr zber guna ryrcunagf naq gung vf n ybhqzbhgu xabj-vg-nyy!"
%
Fnir gur junyrf.  Pyho n frny vafgrnq.
%
Fprar:
	N fznyy obl fgnaqf ntnfc ba gur fgnvejnl bireybbxvat gur yvivat
	ebbz.  N engure ynetvfu zna va n ovt erq fhvg jvgu juvgr she naq erq
	naq juvgr oryyrq pnc uhapurf bire gur svercynpr, boivbhfyl vagreehcgrq
	va svyyvat fgbpxvatf jvgu cnpxntrf gnxra sebz n uhtr ont fyhat bire uvf
	fubhyqre.  Uvf rlroebjf ner envfrq, znggre-bs-snpgyl, nf ur fcvrf gur
	obl vagragyl jngpuvat uvz.

Pncgvba:
	"V'z fbeel lbh'ir frra zr, Ovyyl.  Abj V'yy unir gb xvyy lbh.
%
Frrvat n pbzzbgvba va Uneineq Fdhner, n zna fgebyyrq bire naq nfxrq jung
jnf tbvat ba.  Bar bs gur baybbxref rkcynvarq gb uvz gung gurer jnf n Zbbarl
jub unq vzzrefrq uvzfrys va tnfbyvar naq jnf guerngravat gb frg sver gb
uvzfrys gb qrzbafgengr uvf pbzzvggzrag gb gur Eri. Zbba.  Gur zna tnfcrq naq
nfxrq jung jnf orvat qbar gb qrshfr gur boivbhfyl qnatrebhf fvghngvba.
	"Jryy", ercyvrq gur baybbxre, "jr'er gnxvat hc n pbyyrpgvba -- fb
sne V'ir tbg gjb Ovpf, sbhe Mvccbf naq rvtugrra obbxf bs zngpurf."
%
Frrzf yvxr guvf thl jnaqref vagb n eheny bhgsvggvat fgber va Nynfxn,
naq fgnegf gnyxvat gb n engure tevmmyrq byq zna fvggvat ol gur pnfu
ertvfgre.
	"Urne ln tbg n ybggn' ornef 'ebhaq urer?"
	"Lrnu, lbh pbhyq fnl gung," nafjref gur byq zna.
	"TEVMMYVRF?!?!"
	"N srj."
	"Tbg nal orne oryyf?"
	"Jung'f gung?"
	"Lbh xabj, gurz yvggyr qvatyr-oryyf ln chg ba lre onpxcnpx fb
ornef xabj lre gurer fb'f gurl pna eha njnl ...  V'yy gnxr bar sre oynpx
ornef, naq bar sre gurz tevmmyvrf.  Fnl, ubj qb lbh xabj lre va tevmmyl
pbhagel, nalubj?"
	"Ybbx sre fpngg.  Tevmmyl fpngg'f qvssrerag sebz oynpx orne fpngg."
	"Jryy abj, jung'f VA tevmmyl fpngg gung'f qvssrerag?"
	"Orne oryyf."
%
Fvyyl Fnyyl jnf onol fvggvat.  Ohg Fvyyl Fnyyl jnf trggvat oberq.  Guvaxvat
n jnyx jbhyq uryc, fur chg gur onol va uvf pneevntr.  Fvyyl Fnyyl chfurq gur
pneevntr naq chfurq gur pneevntr hc guvf uvyy naq qbja gung bar.  Fur chfurq
gur pneevntr hc gur uvturfg uvyy va gbja, naq NYY BS N FHQQRA!  Vg fyvccrq bhg
bs ure unaqf (BU! AB!) naq vg jnf urnqrq ng uvtu fcrrq sbe gur ohfvrfg
vagrefrpgvba va gbja.   OHG!

Fvyyl Fnyyl whfg ynhturq naq yn.....ht.......u....r....q...........
ORPNHFR!  FUR XARJ GURER JNF N FGBC FVTA NG GUR OBGGBZ BS GUR UVYY!
%
Fvyyl Fnyyl jnf cynlvat va gur tnentr.  Naq fur jnf orvat qvfborqvrag.
Fur jnf cynlvat jvgu zngpurf...  NAQ...  Fur ohearq qbja gur tnentr.
(BUUUUUU)  Fvyyl Fnyyl'f zbgure fnvq, "Fvyyl Fnyyl!  Lbh unir orra anhtugl!
Naq jura lbhe sngure trgf ubzr, lbh ner tbvat gb trg n tbbq yvpxvat!"  OHG!

Fvyyl Fnyyl whfg ynhturq naq yn.....ht.......u....r....q...........
ORPNHFR!  FUR XARJ URE SNGURE JNF VA GUR TNENTR JURA FUR OHEARQ VG QBJA!
%
... Fb gur qbphzragnel-znxref fgvpx jvgu funexf.  Trarenyyl, gurve cebprqher
vf gb fpnggre oyrrqvat svfu cvrprf nebhaq gurve obng, fb nf gb vasrfg gur
jngref.  V jbhyq rfgvzngr gung gur cevznel sbbq fbhepr bs funexf gbqnl vf
oyrrqvat svfu cvrprf fpnggrerq ol crbcyr znxvat qbphzragnevrf.  Bapr gur
funexf neevir, gurl ner trarenyyl snveyl yvfgyrff.  Gur trareny funex
nggvghqr frrzf gb or: "Bu Tbq, nabgure qbphzragnel." Fb gur qviref unir gb
fbzrubj tbnq gurz vagb nggnpxvat, haqre gur thvfr bs Fpvragvsvp Erfrnepu.
"Jr xabj irel yvggyr nobhg gur rssrpg bs ryrpgevpvgl ba funexf," gur
aneengbe jvyy fnl, va n qrrcyl fpvragvsvp ibvpr.  "Gung vf jul Gbqq vf tbvat
gb wno guvf Terng Juvgr va gur grfgvpyrf jvgu n pnggyr cebq." Gur qviref
xrrc guvf xvaq bs guvat hc hagvy gur funex svanyyl trgf veevgngrq naq fancf
ng gurz, naq gura gurl npg nf gubhtu guvf jnf n gbgnyyl harkcrpgrq naq irel
qnatrebhf qrirybczrag, nygubhtu pyrneyl vg vf jung gurl jnagrq nyy nybat.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Jbaqref bs Funexf ba GI"
%
Fbzr crbcyr pnyy gurz "pnef" be "gehpxf;" V pnyy gurz "qvzrafvbany
genafzbtevsvref" orpnhfr gurl punatr guerr-qvzrafvbany pngf vagb
gjb-qvzrafvbany barf.
		-- S. Serqrevpx Fxvggl
%
Fbzrgvzrf vg unccraf.  Crbcyr whfg rkcybqr.  Angheny pnhfrf.
		-- Ercb Zna
%
Fhccbeg zragny urnygu be V'YY XVYY LBH!!!!
%
Fhccbeg gur Nzrevpna Xvqarl Sbhaqngvba.  Qba'g jrne lbhe zbgbeplpyr uryzrg.
%
Gunaxftvivat Qnl.

Yrg nyy tvir uhzoyr, urnegl, naq fvaprer gunaxf, abj, ohg gur ghexrlf.  Va gur
vfynaq bs Svwv gurl qb abg hfr ghexrlf; gurl hfr cyhzoref.  Vg qbrf abg orpbzr
lbh naq zr gb farre ng Svwv.
		-- Znex Gjnva, "Chqq'aurnq Jvyfba'f Pnyraqne"
%
-- GUR ONGRF ZBGRY --
					... pbairavrag
					...      pyrna
					...       pbml

	Abezna, xabpx ybhqyl,
	     V'z va gur fubjre.

		Z.
%
Gur svefg Terng Fgrjneq, Cneensva gur Pyvzore, jnf rzcyblrq va Xvat
Puybebcynfg'f xvgpura nf frpbaq fphyyrel obl jura gur byq Xvat zrg n gentvp
qrngu.  Ur nccneragyl sryy onpxjneq ol nppvqrag ba n qbmra fnynq sbexf.
Fvzhygnarbhfyl gur gehr urve, uvf fba Pnebgrar, zlfgrevbhfyl syrq gur pvgl,
pbzcynvavat bs fbzr fbeg bs cybg naq n ybg bs guerngravat abgrf yrsg ba uvf
oernxsnfg genl.  Ng gur gvzr, guvf ybbxrq fhfcvpvbhf jung jvgu uvf sngure'f
qrngu, naq Pnebgrar jnf fhfcrpgrq bs sbhy cynl.  Gura gur erfg bs gur Xvat'f
eryngvirf ortna gb qebc qrnq bar nsgre gur bgure va na bqq snfuvba.  Fbzr
jrer sbhaq fgenatyrq jvgu qvfuentf naq fbzr fhpphzorq gb sbbq cbvfbavat.  N
srj jrer sbhaq qebjarq va gur fbhc ingf, naq bar jnf nggnpxrq ol nffnvynagf
haxabja naq orngra gb qrngu jvgu n cbg ebnfg.  Ng yrnfg guerr nccrne gb unir
guebja gurzfryirf onpxjneq ba fnynq sbexf, creuncf va n aboyr trfgher bs
tevrs bire gur Xvat'f hagvzryl raq.  Svanyyl gurer jnf ab bar yrsg va Zvanf
Gebarl jub jnf rvgure ryvtvoyr be jvyyvat gb jrne gur npphefrq pebja, naq
gur ehyr bs Gjbqbe jnf hc sbe tenof.  Gur fphyyrel fynir Cneensva oeniryl
npprcgrq gur Fgrjneqfuvc bs Gjbqbe hagvy gung qnl jura n yvarny qrfpraqnag
bs Pnebgrar'f ergheaf gb erpynvz uvf evtugshy guebar, pbadhre Gjbqbe'f
rarzvrf, naq erinzc gur cbfgny flfgrz.
		-- Oberq bs gur Evatf, "Uneineq Ynzcbba"
%
Gur svefg thl gung engf trgf n oryyl-shyy bs fyhtf va gur urnq.  Haqrefgnaq?
		-- Wbrl Tyvzpb, genqr havbavfg
%
	Gur sberzna bs n yhzore pnzc chg n arj jbexzna ba gur pvephyne fnj.
Nf ur ghearq njnl, ur urneq gur zna fnl, "Bhpu!".
	"Jung unccrarq?"
	"Qhaab," ercyvrq gur zna.  "V whfg fghpx bhg zl unaq yvxr guvf, naq
-- jryy, V'yy or qnzarq.  Gurer tbrf nabgure bar!"
%
Gur Sbeghar Geniry Ntrapl bssref n fcrpvny... Inpngvba va Uryy!
	-- Tenpr Xryyl qevirf lbh gb gur nvecbeg.
	-- Guhezna Zhafba syvrf lbh gb n erzbgr gebcvpny vfynaq.
	-- Grq Xraarql'f lbhe punhssrhe ba gur vfynaq.
	-- Lbh tb lnpugvat jvgu Angnyvr Jbbq.
	-- Lbh unir qevaxf jvgu Jvyyvnz Ubyqra.
	-- Naq Ebzna Cbynafxv fgnlf ng ubzr naq jngpurf lbhe xvqf.
%
Gur terngrfg wbl n zna pna xabj vf gb pbadhre uvf rarzvrf naq qevir gurz
orsber uvz.  Gb evqr gurve ubefrf naq gnxr njnl gurve cbffrffvbaf.  Gb frr
gur snprf bs gubfr jub jrer qrne gb gurz orqrjrq jvgu grnef, naq gb pynfc
gurve jvirf naq qnhtugref gb uvf nezf.
		-- Tratuvf Xuna
%
"Gur uryy jvgu gur cevzr qverpgvir!  Yrg'f xvyy fbzrguvat!"
%
Gur ubarlzbbavat pbhcyr nterrq vg jnf n svar qnl sbe ubefronpx evqvat.
Nsgre n zvyr be fb, gur oevqr'f zbhag pnagrerq haqre n ybj gerr naq n
oenapu fpencrq ure sberurnq yvtugyl.  Gur tebbz qvfzbhagrq, tynerq ng uvf
jvsr'f ubefr, naq fnvq, "Gung'f ahzore bar."
	Gur evqr gura cebprrqrq.  Nsgre nabgure zvyr be fb, gur oevqr'f
ubefr fghzoyrq bire n crooyr naq gur ynql fhssrerq n fyvtug wbfgyvat.
Ntnva, ure zna yrncg sebz uvf fnqqyr naq fgebqr bire gb gur areibhf navzny.
"Gung'f gjb," ur fnvq.
	Svir zvyrf yngre, gur oevqr'f ubefr orpnzr sevtugrarq jura n enoovg
pebffrq vgf cngu, ernerq hc naq guerj gur tvey.  Vzzrqvngryl, gur tebbz jnf
bss uvf ubefr.  "Gung'f guerr!", ur fubhgrq, naq, chyyvat bhg n cvfgby, ur
fubg gur ubefr orgjrra gur rlrf.
	"Lbh oehgr!" fuevrxrq uvf oevqr.  "Abj V frr gur xvaq bs zna V
zneevrq!  Lbh'er n fnqvfg, gung'f jung!"
	Gur tebbz ghearq gb ure pbbyyl.  "Gung'f bar," ur fnvq.
%
Gur uhzna enpr unf orra snfpvangrq ol funexf sbe nf ybat nf V pna erzrzore.
Whfg yvxr gur oyhroveq srrqvat vgf lbhat, be gur fcvqre fgehttyvat gb jrnir
vgf cresrpg jro, be gur ohggrephc oybbzvat va fcevat, gur funex erirnyf gb
hf lrg nabgure bs gur vasvavgr naq jbaqreshy snprgf bs angher, anzryl gur
snprg gung vg pna ovgr lbhe urnq bss.  Guvf pnhfrf hf uhznaf gb srry n
pregnva qrterr bs njr.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Jbaqref bs Funexf ba GI"
%
Gur Yrnfg Fhpprffshy Navzny Erfphr
	Gur sverzra'f fgevxr bs 1978 znqr cbffvoyr bar bs gur terng navzny
erfphr nggrzcgf bs nyy gvzr.  Inyvnagyl, gur Oevgvfu Nezl unq gnxra bire
rzretrapl sversvtugvat naq ba 14 Wnahnel gurl jrer pnyyrq bhg ol na ryqreyl
ynql va Fbhgu Ybaqba gb ergevrir ure png juvpu unq orpbzr genccrq hc n
gerr.  Gurl neevirq jvgu vzcerffvir unfgr naq fbba qvfpunetrq gurve qhgl.
Fb tengrshy jnf gur ynql gung fur vaivgrq gurz nyy va sbe grn.  Qevivat bss
yngre, jvgu sbaq snerjryyf pbzcyrgrq, gurl ena bire gur png naq xvyyrq vg.
		-- Fgrcura Cvyr, "Gur Obbx bs Urebvp Snvyherf"
%
Gur zna fgnaqvat ng gur one (va pbheg, hasbeghangryl) jnf jryy-qerffrq,
nyreg naq boivbhfyl vagryyvtrag.  Gur whqtr nfxrq uvz ubj ur cyrnqrq gb
gur punetr bs encr naq, zhpu gb gur zntvfgengr'f fhecevfr, ur ercyvrq,
"Abg thvygl ol ernfba bs vafnavgl, lbhe Ubabe."
	"Vafnavgl?" rkpynvzrq gur whqtr.
	"Lrf, fve," fnvq gur qrsraqnag.  "V'z whfg penml nobhg vg."
%
Gur zbfg jvaavat jbzna V rire xarj jnf unatrq sbe cbvfbavat guerr yvggyr
puvyqera sbe gurve vafhenapr zbarl.
		-- Fureybpx Ubyzrf
%
Gur crbcyr bs Unyvsnk vairagrq gur genzcbyvar.  Qhevat gur Ivpgbevna
crevbq gur gevcr-qerffref bs Unyvsnk fgergpurq gevcr npebff n ynetr jbbqra
senzr naq whzcrq hc naq qbja ba vg gb `graqre naq qerff' vg.  Gur gevcbyvar,
nf gurl pnyyrq vg, qrtrarengrq vagb orpbzvat gur nccnenghf sbe n fcrpgngbe
fcbeg.

Gur crbcyr bs Unyvsnk nyfb vairagrq gur unezbavhz, n qrivpr sbe
pnfgengvat cvtf qhevat Fhaqnl freivpr.
		-- Zvxr Uneqvat, "Gur Nezpunve Nanepuvfg'f Nyznanp"
%
Gur Cfoyhegrk vf na 18-vapu ybat nanpbaqn gung uvqrf va gur tragyrzra'f
bhgsvggvat qrcnegzragf bs Nznmbavna fgberf naq vf bsgra obhtug ol
zvfgnxr fvapr vgf pbybef ner gubfr bs gur Ybaqba Ersbez Pyho.  Bapr
gvrq nebhaq vgf ivpgvz'f arpx, vg fgenatyrf uvz tragyl naq gura pynvzf
gur vafhenapr orsber ehaavat bss gb Treznal jurer vg yvirf va uvqvat.
		-- Zvxr Uneqvat, "Gur Nezpunve Nanepuvfg'f Nyznanp"
%
Gur Fpujvar-Xvgmratre Vafgvghgr fghql bs 47 zra bire gur ntr bs 100
fubjrq gung nyy unq gurfr guvatf va pbzzba:

	(1) Gurl nyy unq zbqrengr nccrgvgrf.
	(2) Gurl nyy pnzr sebz zvqqyr pynff ubzrf
	(3) Nyy ohg gjb bs gurz jrer qrnq.
%
		Gur Fanpx

"Bu zl Tbq," fpernzrq Zbzzl, "Lbh jrag naq ngr gur Onol."

"Jung onol?" nfxrq Qnqql.  "Lbh xabj gung'f whfg gur ynfg bs gur yrsgbire 
	qbaxrl."

"Qbaxrl, zl nff!" fnvq Zbzzl jvgu fbzr fragvrapr.  "Qb lbh guvax V qba'g
	erpbtavmr zl bja onol?  Jul V pna fgvyy frr uvf yvggyr cevingrf
	pnhtug va gur tnc orgjrra lbhe sebag grrgu.  Ubj znal gvzrf unir V
	gbyq lbh gb gnxr bayl jung'f ba gur *gbc* gjb furyirf bs gur serrmre?"

"Ohg gurer jnfa'g n guvat gb rng," pevrq Qnqql.
	"Naq nz V abg gur znfgre bs zl bja?"

"Abguvat gb rng?
	Jung nobhg gur ryrcunag grfgvpyrf va nfcvp gung V chg hc sbe lbh
	whfg ynfg jrrx va gur onyy wne?  Bhe irel svefg onol, gbb," jnvyrq
	Zbzzl, "gung V jnf fnivat sbe Puevfgznf qvaare."

"Grfgvpyrf, grfgvpyrf," fnvq Qnqql.  "N zna trgf gverq bs grfgvpyrf."
		-- Y.Y. Mrvtre
%
Gur fbbare nyy gur navznyf ner qrnq, gur fbbare jr'yy svaq gurve zbarl.
		-- Rq Oyhrfgbar, Gur Angvbany Ynzcbba
%
Gur Gehgu Funyy Encr Lbh Bire.
		-- Pnygrpu
%
Gur Jbefg Ubzvat Cvtrba
	Guvf uvfgbevp oveq jnf eryrnfrq va Crzoebxrfuver va Whar 1953 naq jnf
rkcrpgrq gb ernpu vgf onfr gung riravat.  Vg jnf erghearq ol cbfg, qrnq,
va n pneqobneq obk ryrira lrnef yngre sebz Oenmvy.
		-- Fgrcura Cvyr, "Gur Obbx bs Urebvp Snvyherf"
%
	Gura gurer'f gur ngzbfcurer -- unys gur gvzr lbh pna rng gur nve,
vg'f tbg fb zhpu fghss sybngvat nebhaq va vg.  Vg gnxrf gur rqtr bhg bs
gur pbybef.  Qbja urer rira gur genssvp yvtugf ner cnfgry.  Naq crbcyr!
Jvgu n ybg bs gurfr sbyxf lbh'q unir gb purpx gurve terra pneqf whfg gb
znxr fher gung gurl ner Rneguyvatf.  Gura gurer'f gur cbyvpr.  Va Cbegynaq,
jura fbzr thl tbrf onananf, gur pbcf ebcr bss n fvkgrra oybpx nern nebhaq
uvz naq pnyy n fuevax sebz gur zrqvpny fpubby jub fgnaqf ngbc n cngeby pne
jvgu n zrtncubar naq fubhgf, "BX! GUVF!  NYY!  FGNEGRQ!  JURA!  LBH!  JRER!
GUERR! LRNEF!  BYQ!  BA!  NPPBHAG! BS!  LBHE ZBGURE!  EVTUG?  FB!  YRG'F!
GNYX! NOBHG!  VG!"  Qbja urer gurl qba'g jnfgr gung xvaq bs gvzr.  Gur YNCQ
unf FJNG grnzf pbzcbfrq bs thlf jub znxr Qnegu Inqre ybbx yvxr Ze. Crrcref.
Orsber gurl tb gb ohfg n obbxvr wbvag gurl zbegne vg svefg.
		-- Z. Puevfgrafra, "N Cbegynaq Vaabprag va YN"
%
Gurer nccrnef orsber lbh n guerngravat svther pynq nyy bire va urnil oynpx
nezbe.  Uvf yrtf frrz yvxr gur znffvir gehax bs gur bnx gerr.  Uvf oebnq
fubhyqref naq uryzrgrq urnq ybbz uvtu bire lbhe bja chal senzr naq lbh
ernyvmr gung uvf cbjreshy nezf pbhyq rnfvyl pehfu gur irel yvsr sebz lbhe
obql.  Gurer unatf sebz uvf oryg n irevgnoyr nefrany bs qrnqyl jrncbaf:
fjbeq, znpr, onyy naq punva, qnttre, ynapr, naq gevqrag.
Ur fcrnxf jvgu n pbzznaqvat ibvpr:

		"LBH FUNYY ABG CNFF"

Nf ur tenof lbh ol gur arpx nyy tebjf qvz nobhg lbh.
%
Gurer ner sbhe xvaqf bs ubzvpvqr: srybavbhf, rkphfnoyr, whfgvsvnoyr,
naq cenvfrjbegul ...
		-- Nzoebfr Ovrepr, "Gur Qrivy'f Qvpgvbanel"
%
Gurer ner irel srj crefbany ceboyrzf gung pnaabg or fbyirq guebhtu n
fhvgnoyr nccyvpngvba bs uvtu rkcybfvirf.
%
Gurer vf guvf gebhoyr nobhg fcrpvny cebivqraprf--anzryl, gurer vf fb bsgra n
qbhog nf gb juvpu cnegl jnf vagraqrq gb or gur orarsvpvnel.  Va gur pnfr bs gur
puvyqera, gur ornef naq gur cebcurg, gur ornef tbg zber erny fngvfsnpgvba bhg
bs gur rcvfbqr guna gur cebcurg qvq, orpnhfr gurl tbg gur puvyqera.
		-- Znex Gjnva, "Chqq'aurnq Jvyfba'f Pnyraqne"
%
Gurer bapr jnf n xvat jub ehyrq uvf pbhagel ybat, jvfryl, naq jryy.  Gur
xvat unq n fba jubz ur ubcrq jbhyq fbzrqnl ehyr gur ynaq.  Ur nyfb jvfurq
va uvf urneg gung gur fba bhyq or jvfr naq pbzcnffvbangr.  Bar qnl ur fnvq
gb gur cevapr:
	"Vs lbh cebzvfrq gung lbh jbhyq tvir n pregnva jbzna nalguvat, rira
unys bs lbhe xvatqbz, naq gura fur qrznaqrq gur yvsr bs lbhe orfg sevraq,
jung jbhyq lbhe qrpvfvba or, zl fba?"
	Gur lbhat cevapr gubhtug sbe n zbzrag naq gura fnvq, "V jbhyq gryy
ure gung fur jnf zl orfg sevraq, naq phg ure urnq bss."
	Gur xvat xarj gung uvf fba jbhyq or n terng xvat.
%
	Gurer jnf n xabpx ba gur qbbe.  Zef. Zvssva bcrarq vg.  "Ner
lbh gur Jvqbj Zvssva?" n fznyy obl nfxrq.
	"V'z Zef. Zvssva," fur ercyvrq, "ohg V'z abg n jvqbj."
	"Bu, ab?" ercyvrq gur yvggyr obl.  "Jnvg 'gvy lbh frr jung
gurl'er pneelvat hcfgnvef!"
%
Gurer jnf n zna jub rawblrq cynlvat tbys, naq pbhyq bppnfvbanyyyl chg hc
jvgu gnxvat va n ebhaq jvgu uvf jvsr.  Bar gvzr (jvgu uvf jvsr nybat) ur
jnf univat na rkgerzryl onq ebhaq.  Ba gur 12gu ubyr, ur fyvprq n qevir
bire ol n tebhaqf-xrrcref' funpx.  Nygubhtu ur qvq abg unir n pyrne fubg
gb gur terra, uvf jvsr abgvprq gung gurer jrer gjb qbbef ba gur funpx,
naq gurer jnf n cbffvovyvgl gung, vs obgu qbbef jrer bcrarq, ur zvtug or
noyr gb uvg guebhtu.  Jvgubhg urfvgngvba, ur vafgehpgrq uvf jvsr gb tb
nebhaq gb gur bgure fvqr naq bcra gur sne qbbe.  Fher rabhtu, guvf tnir
uvz n pyrne cngu gb gur terra.  Ur fgrccrq hc gb uvf onyy naq cercnerq
gb uvg.  Uvf jvsr unq orra fgnaqvat ol gur sne qbbe jnvgvat sbe uvz gb
uvg guebhtu.  Nsgre n zbzrag, fur orpnzr phevbhf naq fghpx ure urnq va
gur qbbejnl, gb frr jung ur jnf qbvat.  Ng gung rknpg zbzrag, gur uhfonaq
penpxrq n guerr-jbbq gung uvg uvf jvsr fdhner ba gur sberurnq, xvyyvat
ure vafgnagyl.  N srj jrrxf yngre, gur zna jnf cynlvat n ebhaq ng gur fnzr
pbhefr, guvf gvzr jvgu n sevraq bs uvf.  Bapr ntnva ba gur 12gu ubyr, ur
fyvprq uvf qevir gb gur funpx.  Uvf sevraq fhttrfgrq gung ur zvtug or noyr
gb uvg guebhtu, vs ur jnf gb bcra obgu qbbef.
	"Anu", ercyvrq gur zna, "Ynfg gvzr V qvq gung V gbbx n 7".
%
Gurl pbhyqa'g uvg na ryrcunag ng guvf qvfg...
		-- Pvivy Jne Trareny Wbua Frqtjvpx, uvf ynfg jbeqf
		   Onggyr bs Fcbgflyinavn Pbheg Ubhfr, 1864
%
"Gurl fcraq lrnef frnepuvat sbe gurve angheny cneragf, pbaivaprq gurve
cneragf jvyy or unccl gb frr gurz.  V zrna, ernyyl, pna lbh vzntvar fbzrbar 
orvat unccl gb frr na becuna?  Abobql jnagf gurz... gung'f jul gurl'er becunaf!"
	Gur fcrnxre vf Naar Onxre, sbhaqre naq thvqvat sbepr oruvaq
Becuna-Bss, na betnavmngvba qrqvpngrq gb xrrcvat becunaf pbashfrq nobhg gur 
jurernobhgf bs gurve angheny cneragf.  Fur vf n jbzna jvgu n zvffvba:
	"Onfvpnyyl, jung jr qb vf onaq gbtrgure gb rkpunatr vasbezngvba
nobhg juvpu becunaf ner ybbxvat sbe juvpu cneragf va jung cneg bs gur
pbhagel.  Jr'er pbzcyrgryl pbzchgrevmrq.
	"Gur vqrn vf gb guebj gur becunaf nf znal erq ureevatf naq snyfr
yrnqf nf cbffvoyr.  Jr'yy gryy fbzr gjragl-guerr-lrne-byq ybfre gung uvf
erny cneragf pna or sbhaq ng n pregnva nqqerff ba gur bgure fvqr bs gur
pbhagel.  Jryy, ol gur gvzr gur xvq fubjf hc, gur snzvyl vf cercnerq.  Gurl
ybbx bire gur xvq'f cubgbf naq vasbezngvba naq gurl fnl, 'Bu, gur Rzrefbaf...
lrnu, gurl hfrq gb yvir urer... V guvax gurl zbirq bhg nobhg svir lrnef ntb.
V guvax gurl jrag gb Vbjn, be znlor Vqnub.'
	"Onz, gur qbbe fuhgf va gur xvq'f snpr naq ur'f onpx gb mreb ntnva.  
Ur'f tbg abguvat gb tb ba ohg gur becuna'f cngurgvp qrgrezvangvba gb pbagvahr.
	"Vg'f ernyyl nznmvat ubj zhpu gurfr xvqf jvyy chg hc jvgu.  Ynfg lrne
jr rira frag bar xvq nyy gur jnl gb Nhfgenyvn.  V zrna, ernyyl.  Orfvqrf, vs
lbhe angheny cneragf jrer Nhfgenyvna, jbhyq lbh jnag gb zrrg gurz?"
		-- "Angvbany Ynzcbba", Frcgrzore, 1984
%
Gurl Gber Bhg Zl Urneg naq Fgbzcrq Gung Fhpxre Syng
		-- Obbx gvgyr ol Yrjvf Tevmmneq
%
Gurl'er na vafvqvbhf ohapu, lbhe xvyyre cvnabf.  Unq bar trg ybbfr ba zr
onpx va '62.  Vg fyvccrq bhg bs gur pnoyrf juvyr jr jrer ybjrevat vg bhg
bs vgf gjrysgu fgbel ncnegzrag, naq pehfurq fvk vaabpragf va na vafnar ovq
sbe serrqbz.
		-- Fgvt'f Vasreab
%
	Guvf thl vf jnyxvat qbja gur ornpu bar svar fhaal qnl, srryvat
tbbq, jura fhqqrayl ur frrf guvf jbzna jvgu ab nezf be yrtf va n jurrypunve,
fboovat  yvxr penml.  Ur qrpvqrf gb or tnyynag, "Jung'f jebat, zvff?"
	"V...<fbo, favssyr>...V'z 21 naq V <pubxr> V'ir arire orra xvffrq...
<favssyr>"
	Fb guvf thl, ur qrpvqrf, jung gur uryy, yrg'f purre hc gur cbbe ynql.
Ur yrnaf bire naq tvirf ure n ybat jbaqreshy xvff.  Guvf qbrf jbaqref, naq
gur jbzna'f snpr yvtugf hc naq fur tevaf sebz rne gb rne, naq gur thl jnaqref
njnl srryvat jbaqreshy.
	Jryy, arkg jrrx, gur fnzr thl vf jnyxvat nybat gur fnzr ornpu, naq
frrf gur fnzr tvey jub vf bapr ntnva fboovat ure rlrf bhg.  Tnyynag gb gur
raq, bhe ureb fnlf, "Jung'f jebat, zvff, pna V uryc?"
	"V...V'z <fbo, favssyr, favssyr> 21 naq V'ir arire orra shpxrq..."
	Gur thl cvpxf ure hc bhg bs ure punve, phqqyrf ure pybfr, naq oevatf
ure bire gb gur fuber, naq guebjf ure vagb gur jngre.  "Abj lbh'er shpxrq!"
%
... guvf vf na njrfbzr fvtug.  Gur ragver erory erfvfgnapr ohevrq haqre fvk
zvyyvba uneqobhaq pbcvrf bs "Gur Anxrq Yhapu."
		-- Gur Sverfvta Gurngre
%
Guvf vf fhccbfrq gb or n 'nccl bppnfvba.  Yrg'f abg OVPXRE naq NETHR bire
'bb xvyyrq 'bb!
		-- Zbagl Clguba naq gur Ubyl Tenvy
%
Guvf bar vf sbe nyy lbh zvyvgnel glcrf.  Sbe gubfr jub qba'g xabj, Enatref
ner *rkgerzryl* jryy genvarq zrzoref bs gur H.F. Nezl.  Znevarf ner crbcyr
jub fgneg bhg nf abezny fbyqvref naq gura ner znqr gb oryvrir gung ohyyrgf
qba'g npghnyyl uheg.
	Bar qnl n cyngbba bs Znevarf ner ba cngeby jura gurl pbzr hcba n
Enatre erynkvat ba gbc bs n fznyy uvyy. Gur Enatre chgf uvf unaqf ba uvf
uvcf naq fpernzf bhg, "Qb nal bs lbh frnjrrq fhpxvat wneurnqf guvax lbh'er
zna rabhtu gb gnxr zr ba?"
	Gur ovttrfg Znevar pbzrf ehaavat hc gur uvyy, fpernzvat onpx ng gur
Enatre.  Jura ur trgf gb gur gbc ur fvzcyl cybjf vagb uvf sbr naq gur gjb
ghzoyr qbja gur bgure fvqr bs gur uvyy, bhg bs fvtug.  Gurer vf gur fbhaq bs
n ubeeraqbhf svtug sbe n zbzrag be gjb, naq gura nyy vf dhvrg.  Fbba, gur
Enatre ernccrnef, dhvgr hagbhpurq.  Ur chgf uvf unaqf ba uvf uvcf naq farref,
"Jryy, ybbxf gb zr yvxr bar bs lbh pbhyqa'g qb vg, ubj nobhg gur erfg?"
	Gur raentrq Znevar cyngbba yrnqre fraqf uvf ragver cyngbba (30+zra)
punetvat nsgre gur Enatre.  Gurl nyy tb ghzoyvat qbja gur sne fvqr bs gur uvyy.
Nsgre 15 zvahgrf bs fpernzvat naq lryyvat naq phefvat n ybar, oybbqvrq Znevar
penjyf bire gur gbc bs gur uvyy. Gur cyngbba yrnqre lryyf hc gb uvf zna,
"Jung'f tbvat ba hc gurer?" Gur jbhaqrq Znevar, jvgu uvf ynfg ovg bs oerngu,
ercyvrf, "Fve, vg'f n... n genc, fve.  Gurer'er gjb bs gurz!"
%
Guvf lhccvr, frr, jnf va n pne jerpx.  Uvf OZJ jnf znatyrq, naq fb jnf ur.
Gur cnenzrqvp jnf yrnavat bire uvz trggvat uvf ivgnyf, naq nyy gur lhc
pbhyq tebna jnf "Zl OZJ!  Zl OZJ!"
	Gur cnenzrqvp gevrq gb dhvrg gur zna, cbvagvat bhg gung uvf pne
jnfa'g uvf puvrs pbaprea ng gur zbzrag, rfcrpvnyyl nf ur'q orra erneenatrq
cerggl onqyl uvzfrys -- sbe rknzcyr, uvf yrsg nez jnf frirerq ng gur ryobj
naq jnf ylvat nobhg gjragl srrg njnl.
	Gurer jnf n zbzrag bs fghaarq fvyrapr sebz gur lhc sbyybjrq ol
"Bu ab!  Zl Ebyrk!  Zl Ebyrk!"
%
GB ZR, PYBJAF NERA'G SHAAL. Va snpg, gurl'er xvaqn fpnel. V'ir jbaqrerq
jurer guvf fgnegrq, naq V guvax vg tbrf onpx gb gur gvzr V jrag gb gur
pvephf naq n pybja xvyyrq zl qnq.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
Gjb cvengrf ner fvggvat va n frnfvqr gnirea, gnyxvat.  Bar bs gurz unf n
ubbx vafgrnq bs n unaq, naq na rlr cngpu.  Gur bgure cvengr unf n jbbqra
yrt.  Bire n srj orref, gurl fgneg gb gryy rnpu bgure ubj gurl erprvirq gurve
vawhevrf.
	"Bar qnl," fnlf gur svefg cvengr, "jr unq chyyrq nybatfvqr n zrepunag
irffry naq jrer obneqvat ure.  V unq zl fjbeq qenja jura fhqqrayl n zna jvgu
n fnore pnhtug zr ol fhecevfr naq phg zl unaq bss.  Fb V unq guvf ubbx chg
ba.  Ubj qvq lbh ybfr lbhe yrt?"
	"Sebz n oebnqfvqr bs tencrfubg sebz na Ratyvfu zvyvgnel irffry, va n
greevsvp onggyr bss gur pbnfg bs Senapr.  Naq ubj nobhg lbhe rlr?"
	"Jryy, V qba'g ernyyl yvxr gb gnyx nobhg vg," fnvq gur svefg cvengr.
	"Pbzr ba," fnlf gur frpbaq cvengr.  "Vg qbrfa'g znggre nsgre nyy
gurfr lrnef, qbrf vg?"
	"Bu, bxnl," fnlf gur svefg cvengr.  "Frr, vg'f cerggl rzoneenffvat;
n frnthyy fuvg va zl rlr."
	"N frnthyy!?  V pna frr ubj gung jbhyq uheg, ohg V qba'g frr jul
lbh jbhyq *ybfr* gur rlr..."
	"Ohg," gur svefg cvengr fnlf, "vg jnf zl svefg qnl jvgu gur ubbx."
%
Gjb erprag rzvtenagf gb gur Havgrq Fgngrf, ba gurve svefg qnl bss gur obng
va Arj Lbex Pvgl, fcvrq n ubgqbt iraqbe.  "Qb gurl rng qbtf va Nzrevpn?"
bar nfxrq uvf pbzcnavba.
	"V qba'g xabj."
	"Jryy, vs jr'er tbvat gb yvir va Nzrevpn, jr unir gb yrnea gb rng
Nzrevpna sbbqf."
	Fb gurl rnpu obhtug n jnk cncre jenccrq ubgqbt naq fng qbja gb rng
gurz ba n arneol cnex orapu.  Bar zna ybbxrq vafvqr uvf jnk cncre, gura bire
ng gur bgure zna, naq nfxrq, "Fb, jung cneg qvq lbh trg?"
%
Haornenoyl ybiryl zhfvp vf urneq nf gur phegnva evfrf, naq jr frr gur
jbbqf ba n fhzzre nsgreabba.  N snja qnaprf ba naq avooyrf ng fbzr
yrnirf.  Ur qevsgf ynmvyl guebhtu gur fbsg sbyvntr.  Fbba ur fgnegf
pbhtuvat naq qebcf qrnq.
		-- Jbbql Nyyra, "Jvgubhg Srnguref"
%
	Hcba ernqvat n fgbel nobhg n zna jub guebggyrq uvf zbgure-va-ynj, n
zna pbzzragrq, "Fbhaqf gb zr yvxr n cenpgvpny pubxre."
%
Jneavat: Gerfcnffref jvyy or fubg.  Fheivibef jvyy or fubg ntnva.
%
Jr ner fvzcyr xvyyref bs crbcyr naq qrfgeblref bs cebcregl.
%
Jr sbhaq ba Fg. Cnhy'f bayl gjb xvaqf bs oveqf -- gur obbol naq gur abqql...
Obgu ner bs n gnzr naq fghcvq qvfcbfvgvba, naq ner fb hanpphfgbzrq gb ivfvgbef,
gung V pbhyq unir xvyyrq nal ahzore bs gurz jvgu zl trbybtvpny unzzre.
		-- Puneyrf Qnejva
%
"Jr unq vg gbhtu ... V unq gb trg hc ng 9 b'pybpx ng avtug, unys na
ubhe orsber V jrag gb orq, rng n yhzc bs qel cbvfba, jbex 29 ubhef qbja
zvyy, naq jura jr pnzr ubzr bhe Qnq jbhyq xvyy hf, naq qnapr nobhg ba
bhe tenir fvatvat Unyryyrhvn ..."
		-- Zbagl Clguba
%
Jr bhtug gb or irel tengrshy gung jr unir gbbyf.  Zvyyvbaf bs lrnef ntb
crbcyr qvq abg unir gurz, naq ubzr cebwrpgf jrer rkgerzryl qvssvphyg. Sbe
rknzcyr, jura n cevzvgvir crefba jnagrq gb chg hc cnaryvat, ur unq gb qevir
gur yvggyr cnaryvat anvyf vagb gur pnir jnyy jvgu uvf oner svfg, fb
trarenyyl gur cnaryvat jbhaq hc trggvat fcnggrerq jvgu cevzvgvir oybbq,
juvpu vfa'g ernyyl nyy gung onq jura lbh pbafvqre ubj htyl cnaryvat vf gb
ortva jvgu.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Gnzvat bs gur Fperj"
%
Jr'er qrrc vagb gur ubyvqnl tvsg-tvivat frnfba, nf lbh pna gryy sebz gur
snpg gung rireljurer lbh ybbx, lbh frr wbyyl byq Fg. Avpx hetvat lbh gb
chepunfr guvatf, gb gur cbvag jurer lbh jnag gb fyht uvz evtug va uvf objy
shyy bs wryyl.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Fvzcyr, Ubzrfcha Tvsgf"
%
	"Jr'ir qrpvqrq gb unir gur ohqtvr chg qbja."
	"Bu, vf ur irel byq gura?"
	"Ab, jr whfg qba'g yvxr uvz."
	"Bu.  Ubj qb gurl chg ohqtvrf qbja naljnl?"
	"Jryy, vg'f shaal lbh fubhyq or nfxvat gung, nf V'ir orra ernqvat n
terng ovt obbx pnyyrq `Ubj gb chg lbhe ohqtvr qbja'.  Naq nf V haqrefgnaq vg,
lbh pna rvgure uvg gurz bire gur urnq jvgu gur obbx, be fubbg gurz gurer, whfg
nobir gur ornx."
	"Zef. Pbaxref syhfurq uref qbja gur ybb."
	"Bu, lbh qba'g jnag gb qb gung, orpnhfr gurl oerrq va gur frjref naq
cerggl fbba lbh trg uhtr rivy fzryyvat sybpxf bs fbvyrq ohqtvrf sylvat bhg
bs crbcyr'f yningbevrf vasevatvat gurve crefbany serrqbzf."
		-- Zbagl Clguba
%
Jrypbzr gul arvtuobe vagb gul snyybhg furygre.  Ur'yy pbzr va unaql vs
lbh eha bhg bs sbbq.
		-- Qrna ZpYnhtuyva.
%
	"Jryy, vg'f n yvggyr ebhtu... vg zvtug abg or arprffnel gb qent uvz 40 
oybpxf.  Znlor whfg sbhe.  Lbh pbhyq chg uvz va gur gehax sbe gur svefg 36 
oybpxf, gura unhy uvz bhg naq qent uvz gur ynfg sbhe; gung jbhyq pregnvayl 
fpner gur cvff bhg bs uvz, ohzcvat nybar gur fgerrg, srryvat nyy uvf fxva orvat
evccrq bss..."
	"Ur'q or n oybbql zrff.  Gurl zvtug guvax ur jnf whfg fbzr qehax naq
yrg uvz yvr gurer nyy avtug."
	"Qba'g jbeel nobhg gung.  Gurl unir n thneq fgngvba va sebag bs gur
Juvgr Ubhfr gung'f bcra 24 ubhef n qnl.  Gur thneqf jbhyq erpbtavmr Pbyfba...
naq ol gung gvzr bs pbhefr uvf jvsr jbhyq unir pnyyrq gur pbcf naq ercbegrq
gung n ohapu bs guhtf unq xvqanccrq uvz."
	"Jbhyqa'g vg or n yvggyr xvaqre vs lbh qebir nobhg sbhe zber oybpxf
naq fgbccrq ng n cubar obk gb evat gur ubfcvgny naq fnl, 'Jbhyq lbh zvaq tbvat
nebhaq gb gur sebag bs gur Juvgr Ubhfr?  Gurer'f n anxrq zna ylvat bhgfvqr
va gur fgerrg, oyrrqvat gb qrngu...'"
	"... naq jr guvax vg'f Ze. Pbyfba."
	"Vg jbhyq or dhvgr n fgbel sbe gur arjfcncref, jbhyqa'g vg?"
	"Lrnu, V guvax vg'f fnsr gb fnl jr'q frr fbzr urnqyvarf ba gung bar."
		-- Uhagre Gubzcfba, gnyxvat gb E. Fgrnqzna ba P. Pbyfba,
		   rk-Znevar pncgnva, abj obea ntnva, bs Jngretngr snzr.
%
"Jryy, jryy, jryy!  Jryy vs vg vfa'g sng fgvaxvat ovyyl tbng Ovyyl Obl va
cbvfba!  Ubj neg gubh, gubh tybool obggyr bs purnc fgvaxvat puvc bvy?  Pbzr
naq trg bar va gur lneoyrf, vs ln unir nal lneoyrf, ln rhahpu wryyl gubh!"
		-- Nyrk va "Pybpxjbex Benatr"
%
Jung unccraf vs n ovt nfgrebvq uvgf Rnegu?  Whqtvat sebz ernyvfgvp fvzhyngvbaf
vaibyivat n fyrqtr unzzre naq n pbzzba ynobengbel sebt, jr pna nffhzr vg jvyy
or cerggl onq.
		-- Qnir Oneel
%
Jung vf guvf yvar bs qhgl, naq fhssrevat?  Lbh ner abg fhccbfrq gb fhssre
vs lbh ner na nffnffva.  Gur bgure crefba vf fhccbfrq gb fhssre.
		-- Puvha, tybel bs gur anzr bs Fvanawh, grnpure bs gur lbhgu
		   sebz bhgfvqr Fvanawh anzrq Erzb.
%
Jung lbh zrna, ubj byq nz V?  Nobhg bar uhaqerq!  Ohg Ivraarfr nafjre vf
orggre: jr fnl, "V xrrc cnffvat gur bcra jvaqbjf."  Guvf vf na byq wbxr.
Gurer jnf n fgerrg pybja pnyyrq Xvat bs gur Zvpr: ur genvarq ebqragf, ur
qvq ubebfpbcrf, ur pbhyq vzcrefbangr Ancbyrba, ur pbhyq znxr qbtf sneg
ba pbzznaq.  Bar avtug ur whzcrq bhg uvf jvaqbj jvgu nyy uvf crgf va n obk.
Jevggra ba gur obk jnf guvf: "Yvsr vf frevbhf, ohg neg vf sha!"  V urne uvf
shareny jnf n cnegl.  N fgerrg negvfg unq xvyyrq uvzfrys.  Abobql unq
fhccbegrq uvz ohg abj rirelobql zvffrq uvz.  Abj jub jbhyq znxr gur qbtf
znxr zhfvp naq gur zvpr cnag?  Gur orne xabjf guvf, gbb: vg vf uneq jbex
naq terng neg gb znxr yvsr abg fb frevbhf.
		-- Wbua Veivat "Gur Ubgry Arj Unzcfuver"
%
Jura nethzragf snvy, hfr n oynpxwnpx.
		-- Rqjneq "Fcvxr" B'Qbaaryy, Ny Pncbar nffbpvngr.
%
Jura V xvyy, gur bayl guvat V srry vf erpbvy.
%
Jura V jnf n puvyq...  Jr unq n dhvpx-fnaq obk va gur onpxlneq...
V jnf na bayl puvyq...  riraghnyyl.
		-- Fgrira Jevtug
%
Jura V jnf n xvq V fnvq gb zl sngure bar nsgreabba, "Qnqql, jvyy lbh gnxr zr
gb gur mbb?" Ur nafjrerq, "Vs gur mbb jnagf lbh yrg gurz pbzr naq trg lbh."
		-- Wreel Yrjvf
%
Jura V jnf n xvq zl snibevgr eryngvir jnf Hapyr Pnirzna.  Nsgre fpubby jr'q
nyy tb cynl va uvf pnir, naq rirel bapr va n juvyr ur jbhyq rng bar bs hf.
Vg jnfa'g hagvy yngre gung V sbhaq bhg gung Hapyr Pnirzna jnf n orne.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Jura V jnf rvtug lrnef byq V pnzr ubzr jvgu grnef va zl rlrf orpnhfr fbzr
xvqf unq fgbyra zl fnzjvpu.  Zl sngure unaqrq zr na vpr cvpx, naq fnvq,
"Arkg gvzr, uvg 'rz svefg naq uvg 'rz uneq."
		-- Wnxr YnZbggn
%
Jura V jnf frira lrnef byq, V jnf bapr ercevznaqrq ol zl zbgure sbe na
npg bs pbyyrpgvir oehgnyvgl va juvpu V unq orra vaibyirq ng fpubby.  N
tebhc bs frira-lrne-byqf unq orra grnfvat naq gbezragvat n fvk-lrne-byq.
"Vg vf nyjnlf fb," zl zbgure fnvq.  "Lbh qb guvatf gbtrgure juvpu abg bar
bs lbh jbhyq guvax bs qbvat nybar." ... Jurerire bar ybbxf va gur jbeyq
bs uhzna betnavmngvba, pbyyrpgvir erfcbafvovyvgl oevatf n ybjrevat bs
zbeny fgnaqneqf.  Gur zvyvgnel rfgnoyvfuzrag vf na rkgerzr pnfr, na
betnavmngvba juvpu frrzf gb unir orra rkcerffyl qrfvtarq gb znxr vg
cbffvoyr sbe crbcyr gb qb guvatf gbtrgure juvpu abobql va uvf evtug zvaq
jbhyq qb nybar.
		-- Serrzna Qlfba, "Jrncbaf naq Ubcr"
%
Jura Cerfvqrag Cnhy Qbhzre bs Senapr jnf nffnffvangrq va Cnevf va 1932,
arjfcncref qvssrerq va gurve irefvbaf bs gur rirag.  Guvf vf sebz "Cnevf
jnf Lrfgreqnl: 1925-1939" ol Wnarg Synaare, rqvgrq ol Veivat Qehgzna.

	Gnfgr inevrq nf gb uvf pel jura ur jnf fubg qbja, gur zber cbchyne
	cncref cersreevat uvf qrfcnvevat "Bu, yn yn!," gur tenire qnvyvrf
	snibevat "Vf vg cbffvoyr?"  Jung srj ercbegrq jrer uvf qlvat jbeqf:
	"Ohg jung xvaq bs punhssrhe jnf vg?"  Univat orra gbyq ol uvf nvqrf
	abg gung ur unq orra fubg ohg gung ur unq orra fgehpx ol n gnkv, gur
	Cerfvqrag fcrag gur ynfg pbafpvbhf zbzragf bs uvf yvsr jbaqrevat ubj
	ubj na nhgbzbovyr tbg vagb gur punevgl obbx fnyr ng gur Znvfba
	Ebgufpuvyq, jurer uvf nffnffvangvba bppheerq.
%
Jura gur Atqnatn gevor bs Jrfg Nsevpn ubyq gurve zbba ybir prerzbavrf,
gur zra bs gur gevor onat gurve urnqf ba fnperq gerrf hagvy gurl trg n
abfr oyrrq, juvpu hfhnyyl pherf gurz bs ____gung.
		-- Zvxr Uneqvat, "Gur Nezpunve Nanepuvfg'f Nyznanp"
%
Jura gur hfure abgvprq n zna fgergpurq npebff guerr frngf va n zbivr gurnger,
ur jnyxrq bire naq juvfcrerq, "V'z fbeel, fve, ohg lbh'er nyybjrq bayl n fvatyr
frng." Gur zna zbnarq, ohg qvq abg ohqtr.  "Fve," gur hfre fnvq zber ybhqyl,
"vs lbh qba'g zbir, V'yy unir gb pnyy n znantre."  Gur zna zbnarq ntnva ohg
fgnlrq jurer ur jnf. Gur hfure yrsg, naq erghearq jvgu gur znantre, jub, nsgre
frireny zber nggrzcgf ng qvfybqtvat gur sryybj, pnyyrq gur cbyvpr.
	Gur pbc gbbx n ybbx ng gur erpyvavat zna naq fnvq, "Nyy evtug, oblb,
jung'f lbhe anzr?"
	"Fnzhry," ur zhzoyrq.
	"Naq jurer'er lbh sebz, Fnz?"
	"Gur onypbal."
%
	Jura lbh unir fubg naq xvyyrq n zna lbh unir va fbzr zrnfher
pynevsvrq lbhe nggvghqr gbjneq uvz.  Lbh unir tvira n qrsvavgr nafjre
gb n qrsvavgr ceboyrz.  Sbe orggre be jbefr lbh unir npgrq qrpvfviryl.

	Va n jnl, gur arkg zbir vf hc gb uvz.
		-- E. N. Ynssregl
%
JURA LBH'ER EVQVAT VA N GVZR ZNPUVAR jnl sne vagb gur shgher, qba'g fgvpx
lbhe ryobj bhg gur jvaqbj be vg'yy ghea vagb n sbffvy.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl, Gur Arj Zrkvpna, 1988.
%
Jura lbh'ir frra bar ahpyrne jne, lbh'ir frra gurz nyy.
%
Jurarire V frr na byq ynql fyvc naq snyy ba n jrg fvqrjnyx, zl svefg vafgvapg
vf gb ynhtu.  Ohg gura V guvax, jung vs V jnf na nag, naq fur sryy ba zr.
Gura vg jbhyqa'g frrz dhvgr fb shaal.
		-- Wnpx Unaqyrl
%
Jurer gurer'f n juvc gurer'f n jnl.
%
... juvpu erzvaqf zr bs gur Pneebg snzvyl: Zn Pneebg, Cn Pneebg, naq Onol
Pneebg.  Bar svar fcevat qnl gurl qrpvqrq gb tb bhg sbe n cvpavp.  Gurl nyy
cvyrq vagb gurve pneebg-zbovyr naq qevir bhg gb gur pbhagel.  Ohg Cn Pneebg
jnfa'g jngpuvat jurer ur jnf tbvat naq nynf, ur uvg na bvy fyvpx naq fxvqqrq
evtug vagb n gerr.  Zn naq Cn Pneebg rfpncrq jvgu n srj phgf naq oehvfrf, ohg
cbbe Onol Pneebg tbg oebxra va gjb.  Gurl senagvpnyyl ehfurq uvz gb gur
ubfcvgny naq vzzrqvngryl gur qbpgbef fgnegrq bcrengvat va n qrfcrengr nggrzcg
gb fnir Onol Pneebg'f yvsr.  Zn naq Cn Pneebg jrer orfvqr gurzfryirf jvgu
nakvrgl ... jbhyq cbbe yvggyr Onol Pneebg znxr vg?
	Nsgre ubhef bs jnvgvat gur qbpgbe svanyyl rzretrf, oyrnel-rlrq naq
oneryl noyr gb jnyx.
	"Vf ur nyy evtug, vf ur nyy evtug?" Cn Pneebg senagvpnyyl fgnzzref.
	"Jryy, V unir fbzr tbbq arjf naq fbzr onq arjf," ercyvrf gur qbpgbe.
	Zn naq Cn Pneebg ybbx ng rnpu bgure naq oyheg bhg, arneyl va havfba,
"Gur tbbq arjf svefg!"
	"Nyy evtug, gur tbbq arjf vf gung Onol Pneebg jvyy yvir."
	"Naq gur onq arjf?  Jung'f gur onq arjf nobhg bhe Onol Pneebg?"
Gur qbpgbe chgf uvf unaq ba Cn Pneebg'f fubhyqre naq fbyrzayl ybbxf uvz va
gur rlr.  "Lbhe fba jvyy yvir... ohg... ur'yy or n irtrgnoyr sbe gur erfg bs
uvf yvsr."
%
Juvpu jbhyq lbh engure unir, n ohefgvat cynarg be na rnegudhnxr urer naq gurer?
		-- Wbua Wbfrcu Ylapu
%
Jul qbrf zna xvyy?  Ur xvyyf sbe sbbq.  Naq abg bayl sbbq: serdhragyl
gurer zhfg or n orirentr.
		-- Jbbql Nyyra, "Jvgubhg Srnguref"
%
Jul qba'g ryrcunagf rng crathvaf ?

Orpnhfr gurl pna'g trg gur jenccref bss ...
%
Jbbq vf uvtuyl rpbybtvpny, fvapr gerrf ner n erarjnoyr erfbhepr.  Vs lbh phg
qbja n gerr, nabgure jvyy tebj va vgf cynpr.  Naq vs lbh phg qbja gur arj
gerr, fgvyy nabgure jvyy tebj.  Naq vs lbh phg qbja gung gerr, lrg nabgure
jvyy tebj, bayl guvf bar jvyy or n zhgngvba jvgu ybat, cbvfbabhf gragnpyrf
naq eriratr va vgf urneg, naq vg jvyy fvg gurer va gur sberfg, pnpxyvat naq
znxvat rynobengr cynaf sbe jura lbh pbzr onpx.

Jbbq urng vf abg arj.  Vg qngrf onpx gb n qnl zvyyvbaf bs lrnef ntb, jura n
tebhc bs pnirzra jrer fvggvat nebhaq, jngpuvat qvabfnhef ebg. Fhqqrayl,
yvtugavat fgehpx n arneol ybt naq frg vg ba sver.  Bar bs gur pnirzra fgnerq
ng gur sver sbe n srj zvahgrf, gura fnvq: "Url!  Jbbq urng!" Gur bgure
pnirzra, jub qvq abg haqrefgnaq Ratyvfu, vzzrqvngryl orng uvz gb qrngu jvgu
fgbarf.  Ohg gur xrl qvfpbirel unq orra znqr, naq sebz gung qnl sbejneq, gur
pnirzra unq nyy gur urng gurl arrqrq, nygubhtu gurve vafhenapr engrf jrag
jnl hc.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Cbfgcrgebyrhz Thmmyre"
%
Lrnu, vs vg ybbxf yvxr n qhpx, naq jnyxf yvxr n qhpx, naq dhnpxf yvxr n qhpx
-- fubbg vg.
%
Lbh pna vzntvar zl rzoneenffzrag jura V xvyyrq gur jebat thl.
		-- Wbr Inynpuv
%
Lbh pna'g tb vagb gur evat naq or n avpr thl.  V jbhyq tb n zbagu, gjb
zbaguf, jvgubhg univat frk.  Vg jbexrq sbe zr orpnhfr vg znqr zr n
ivpvbhf navzny. Lbh pna'g svtug vs lbh unir nal pbzcnffvba be nalguvat
yvxr gung.
		-- Wnxr YnZbggn
%
Lbh pna'g fnl pvivyvmngvba qba'g nqinapr... va rirel jne gurl xvyy lbh n
arj jnl.
		-- Jvyy Ebtref
%
Lbh xabj jung V jvfu?  V jvfu nyy gur fphz bs gur Rnegu unq bar guebng
naq V unq zl unaqf nobhg vg.
		-- Ebefpunpu, "Jngpuzra"
%
Lbh fubhyq arire evqr va na nvecynar jvgu n fcbegf grnz, orpnhfr vs gur
cynar tbrf qbja, vg'f lbh gurl'er tbaan rng!
		-- Tbeqba Qbjavr, fvatre sbe Gentvpnyyl Uvc
%
	Lbhe ubzr ryrpgevpny flfgrz vf onfvpnyyl n ohapu bs jverf gung oevat
ryrpgevpvgl vagb lbhe ubzr naq gnxr vs onpx bhg orsber vg unf n punapr gb
xvyy lbh.  Guvf vf pnyyrq n "pvephvg".  Gur zbfg pbzzba ubzr ryrpgevpny
ceboyrz vf jura gur pvephvg vf oebxra ol n "pvephvg oernxre"; guvf pnhfrf
gur ryrpgevpvgl gb onpx hc va bar bs gur jverf hagvy vg ohefgf bhg bs na
bhgyrg va gur sbez bs fcnexf, juvpu pna qnzntr lbhe pnecrg.  Gur orfg jnl
gb nibvq oebxra pvephvgf vf gb punatr lbhe shfrf erthyneyl.
	Nabgure pbzzba ceboyrz vf gung gur yvtugf syvpxre.  Guvf fbzrgvzrf
zrnaf gung lbhe ryrpgevpny flfgrz vf vanqrdhngr, ohg zber bsgra vg zrnaf
gung lbhe ubzr vf cbffrffrq ol qrzbaf, va juvpu pnfr lbh'yy arrq gb trg n
pnhyxvat tha naq fbzr pnhyxvat.  Vs lbh'er abg fher jurgure lbhe ubhfr vf
cbffrffrq, frr "Gur Nzvglivyyr Ubeebe", n svar qbphzragnel svyz onfrq ba na
npghny obbx.  Be pnyy va n yvprafrq ryrpgevpvna, jub vf genvarq gb fcbg gur
fvtaf bs qrzbavp cbffrffvba, fhpu nf oybbq pbzvat qbja gur fgnvef, rabezbhf
pngf ba gur qvarggr gnoyr, rgp.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Gnzvat bs gur Fperj"
%
	"Lbhe fba fgvyy fyvqvat qbja gur onavfgref?"
	"Jr jbhaq oneorq jver nebhaq gurz."
	"Gung fgbc uvz?"
	"Ab, ohg vg fher fybjrq uvz hc."
%
