 (1) Vs vg qbrfa'g fzryy yvxr puvyv, vg cebonoyl vfa'g.
 (2) Vs lbh pngpu na rkcybqvat znaubyr pbire, lbh pna xrrc vg.
 (3) Pnof qevivat ba gur fvqrjnyx ner abg crezvggrq gb cvpx hc cnffratref.
 (4) Vg'f onq znaaref gb yvr qbja vafvqr fbzrbar ryfr'f punyx obql bhgyvar.
 (5) Qba'g yvpx sbbq sebz n fgenatre'f orneq.
 (6) Nibvq cncrejbex sbe lbhe arkg bs xva ol xrrcvat qragny erpbeqf ba lbh.
 (7) Wba Tbggv Nyjnlf unf gur evtug bs jnl.
 (8) Lryyvat ng pno qeviref va Ratyvfu jnfgrf lbhe gvzr naq gurvef.
 (9) Erzrzore:  Erthyne ubg qbtf qb abg unir svatreanvyf.
(10) Gur pvgl qbrf abg rzcybl fb pnyyrq "Jnyyrg Vafcrpgbef".
		-- Qnivq Yrggrezna, "Gbc Gra Arj Lbex Pvgl Crqrfgevna Gvcf"
%
N 6'8", 280-cbhaq Fbhgureare jnyxrq vagb n AL one, fng qbja arkg gb n
cngeba, naq fnvq, "Nu'z ovt, naq nu'z onq, naq V *ybirf* gb shpx Abegurea
jbzra!"  Gur thl jnf fb greevsvrq gung ur chg qbja uvf orre naq ena bhg
bs gur one.
	Gur Erory zbirq bire gb gur arkg thl naq fnvq, "Nu'z ovt naq nu'z
onq naq V *ybirf* gb shpx Arj Lbex jbzra."  Gur thl gbbx bar ybbx ng uvz,
oynapurq naq ena bhg bs gur one.
	Gur zna gura jrag bire gb n fubeg yvggyr thl jvgu "Oebak" jevggra
nyy bire uvz.  "Nu'z ovt naq nu'z onq naq V *ybirf* gb shpx lbhe fvfgre."
	Gur fubeg thl ybbxrq uvz hc naq qbja naq fnvq, "V qba'g oynzr
lbh bar ovg.  Fur'f *tbg* gb or na vzcebirzrag ba lbhef."
%
N svfurezna sebz Znvar jrag gb Nynonzn ba uvf inpngvba.  Ur eragrq n obng,
ebjrq bhg gb gur zvqqyr bs gur ynxr, naq pnfg uvf yvar, ohg jura ur ybbxrq
qbja vagb gur jngre ur jnf ubeevsvrq gb frr n zna jenccrq va punvaf ylvat
ba gur obggbz bs gur ynxr.  Ur dhvpxyl ebjrq gb fuber naq ena gb gur cbyvpr
fgngvba.  "Furevss, furevss," ur tnfcrq, gurer'f n thl jenccrq va punvaf,
qebjarq va gur ynxr!"
	"Abj nva'g gung wrfg yvxr n Lnaxrr," qenjyrq gur furevss, "gb fgrny
zber punva guna ur pna fjvz jvgu?"
%
N tbhezrg erfgnhenag va Pvapvaangv vf bar jurer lbh yrnir gur genl ba
gur gnoyr nsgre lbh rng.
%
N ynaxl Grkna jnf znq orpnhfr Grknf unq whfg orpbzr gur frpbaq ynetrfg fgngr va
gur Havba, fb ur znqr hc uvf zvaq gb zbir gb Nynfxn.  Ur qebir sbe guerr qnlf
naq guerr avtugf gb trg gurer naq svanyyl ur pnzr gb jung ybbxrq yvxr gur fgngr
yvar.  Ur unygrq uvf pne naq jnyxrq hc gb gur obeqre thneq.  "Uv, gurer!  Ubj
qb V orpbzr n erfvqrag bs guvf urer ovttrfg fgngr?" qrznaqrq gur Grkna.
	Gur thneq ybbxrq uvz hc naq qbja naq tevaarq.  "Jnny," ur nafjrerq,
gurer ner guerr guvatf lbh tbggn qb gb trg va.  Svefg, qevax qbja n dhneg bs
110 cebbs pbea yvdhbe jvgubhg oyvaxva'.  Frpbaq, xvyy n tevmmyl orne, naq
guveq, znxr ybir gb na Rfxvzb jbzna."
	"Fbhaqf rnfl rabhtu," fnvq gur Grkna.  "Jurer pna V trg n dhneg bs
guvf urer pbea yvdhbe?"
	"Tbg bar evtug urer," ercyvrq gur thneq.
	Gur Grkna thycrq qbja gur juvfxrl jvgubhg onggvat na rlrynfu.
"Abj, qb lbh unccra gb xabj jurer V pna svaq zr n tevmmyl?"
	"Lrc," nafjrerq gur thneq, "gurer'f n ovt o'ne bire gung jnl, 'obhg
n zvyr... yvirf va n pnir ba gung pyvss."
	Gur Grkna yhepurq zreevyl bss.  Nobhg na ubhe yngre ur erghearq
jvgu uvf pybgurf nyzbfg gbea bss naq uvf snpr fpengpurq naq oybbql.  Ur jnf
fzvyvat unccvyl.  "Abj," ur ebnerq, "jurer'f gung qnza Rfxvzb jbzna lbh
jnag xvyyrq?"
%
N yvggyr Zrkvpna obl pbzrf ubzr sebz fpubby bar qnl naq fnlf gb uvf tenaq-
sngure, "Tenaqqnqql, gbqnl zl grnpure fnvq gung Cnapub Ivyyn, gur onaqvg
hfrq gb envq gbjaf nebhaq urer!  Qvq lbh rire xabj uvz?"
	"Qb *V* xabj Cnapub Ivyyn?" rkpynvzf gur zna.  "Jul, obl, orsber
lbhe sngure jnf obea, V jnf evqvat vagb gbja ba zl ubefr.  Fhqqrayl, sebz
oruvaq gur ohfurf yrncrq Cnapub jvgu uvf fvk-thaf qenja!  Ur gbyq zr gb trg
qbja bss gur ubefr naq gb tvir uvz nyy zl zbarl.  Gura, ur gbyq zr gb fpbbc
fbzr znaher sebz gur tebhaq naq rng vg!"
	"V ershfrq ng svefg, ohg Cnapub unq gur thaf, fb V ngr gur fuvg.
Naq ur fgnegrq ynhtuvat fb uneq gung vg fpnerq uvf ubefr vagb ernevat hc --
V tenoorq gur thaf sebz uvf unaqf!  V fnvq gb Cnapub, `Bxnl, Cnapub, abj
vg'f lbhe ghea -- lbh rng gur fuvg!'  V unq gur thaf, fb ur ngr gur fuvg.
	"Naq lbh nfx zr, puvyq, vs V xabj Cnapub Ivyyn, gur onaqvg!  Jul,
jr unq *yhapu* gbtrgure!"
%
	N zna ragref n crg fubc, frrxvat gb chepunfr n cneebg.  Ur cbvagf
gb n svar pbybeshy oveq naq nfxf ubj zhpu vg pbfgf.
	Jura ur vf gbyq vg pbfgf 70,000 mybglf, ur juvfgyrf va nznmrzrag
naq nfxf jul vg vf fb zhpu.  "Jryy, gur oveq vf syhrag va Vgnyvna naq
Serapu naq pna erpvgr gur crevbqvp gnoyr."  Ur cbvagf gb nabgure oveq
naq vf gbyq gung vg pbfgf 90,000 mybglf orpnhfr vg fcrnxf Serapu naq
Trezna, pna xavg naq pna phefr va Yngva.
	Svanyyl gur phfgbzre nfxf nobhg n qeno tenl oveq.  "Nu," ur vf
gbyq, "gung bar vf 150,000."
	"Jul, jung pna vg qb?" ur nfxf.
	"Jryy," fnlf gur fubcxrrcre, "gb gryy lbh gur gehgu, ur qbrfa'g
qb nalguvat, ohg gur bgure oveqf pnyy uvz Ze. Frpergnel."  
		-- orvat gbyq va Cbynaq, 1987
%
N zna tbrf vagb n one naq ortvaf gb gryy n Cbyvfu wbxr.  Gur zna fvggvat
arkg gb uvz, n ovt uhyxvat cbjreubhfr, gheaf naq fnlf zranpvatyl, "*V'z*
Cbyvfu."
	Ur gura pnyyf bhg, "Vina!  Pbzr bire urer naq oevat lbhe oebgure."
Gjb zra, ovttre guna gur svefg, nccrne sebz gur onpx ebbz.
	"Wbfrs!" gur zna pnyyf bhg, "pbzr urer n frpbaq, naq oevat Yraqy
jvgu lbh."  Gjb zber zra nccrne, naq nyy svir zra pebjq nebhaq gur zna jvgu
gur wbxr.
	"Abj," fnlf gur svefg Cbyvfu zna, "qb lbh jnag gb svavfu gung wbxr?"
	"Anu," fnlf gur zna.
	"Bu, ab?  Naq jul abg?  V'z fher vg jnf irel shaal," fnlf gur Cbyvfu
zna, bcravat naq pybfvat uvf svfg.  "Ner lbh fpnerq?"
	"Ab," ercyvrf gur zna.  "V whfg qba'g srry yvxr univat gb rkcynva vg
svir gvzrf."
%
	N zna tbrf gb n gnvybe gb gel ba n arj phfgbz-znqr fhvg.  Gur
svefg guvat ur abgvprf vf gung gur nezf ner gbb ybat.
	"Ab ceboyrz," fnlf gur gnvybe.  "Whfg oraq gurz ng gur ryobj
naq ubyq gurz bhg va sebag bs lbh.  Frr, abj vg'f svar."
	"Ohg gur pbyyne vf hc nebhaq zl rnef!"
	"Vg'f abguvat.  Whfg uhapu lbhe onpx hc n yvggyr ... ab, n
yvggyr zber ... gung'f vg."
	"Ohg V'z fgrccvat ba zl phssf!"  gur zna pevrf va qrfcrengvba.
	"Ah, oraq lbh xarrf n yvggyr gb gnxr hc gur fynpx.  Gurer lbh
tb.  Ybbx va gur zveebe -- gur fhvg svgf cresrpgyl."
	Fb, gjvfgrq yvxr n cergmry, gur zna yhepurf bhg bagb gur
fgerrg.  Eron naq Syberapr frr uvz tb ol.
	"Bu, ybbx," fnlf Eron, "gung cbbe zna!"
	"Lrf," fnlf Syberapr, "ohg jung n ornhgvshy fhvg."
		-- Neguhe Anvzna, "Rirel Tbl'f Thvqr gb Lvqqvfu"
%
N zna vf jnyxvat qbja gur fgerrg jura ur frrf n zna jvgu sbhe nezf, naq
nagraanr pbzvat bhg bs uvf urnq.  Ur tbrf hc gb uvz naq fnlf, "Lbh'er abg
sebz nebhaq urer, ner lbh?"
	"Ab," ercyvrf gur zna jvgu gur nagraanr.
	"Lbh xabj," pbagvahrf gur zna, "V qba'g guvax lbh'er na Nzrevpna,
rvgure.  Va snpg, V org lbh qba'g rira pbzr sebz guvf cynarg!"
	"Evtug ntnva," fnlf gur zna jvgu sbhe nezf.  "V'z sebz Znef."
	"Jryy," fnlf gur zna, "gung'f dhvgr fbzr pbasvthengvba lbh'ir tbg
gurer, jvgu gubfr sbhe nezf naq gubfr nagraanr naq rirelguvat."
	"Jr Znegvnaf nyy unir sbhe nezf naq nagraanr."
	"Jryy, gung'f whfg nznmvat," ercyvrf gur zna, "naq ubj nobhg gung
ovt tbyq pbyberq cyngr va gur zvqqyr bs lbhe purfg, jung'f gung, qb nyy
Znegvnaf unir gung?"
	"Jryy, ab," fnlf gur Znegvna.  "Abg gur *tblvz*."
%
N Zrkvpna naq n Grkna jbexrq gbtrgure sbe n pbafgehpgvba svez, naq,
juvyr gurl jrer tbbq sevraqf, gurl unq n sevraqyl evinyel bire jubfr jvsr 
jnf gur orggre pbbx.  Bar jrrxraq, nf gur Grkna'f jvsr jnf bhg bs gbja, gur
Zrkvpna vaivgrq gur Grkna gb unir fhccre jvgu uvf snzvyl.
	Gur Grkna npprcgrq, naq gung riravat fng qbja gb fbzr gur orfg fgrj
gung ur unq rire rngra.  
	"Qnza!  Gung fgrj vf snagnfgvp!" ur rkpynvzrq gb uvf ubfg.  "Jung
xvaq bs zrng vf vg?"
	"Enoorrg fgrj," ercyvrq gur Zrkvpna.
	"Enoovg?" ercyvrq gur Grkna. "Gurer nera'g nal enoovgf nebhaq urer."
	"Fv, zl serraq, gur enoorrgf znxr gur orrt abvfr, naq V fubbg gurrz."
	"Enoovgf qba'g znxr nal abvfr..."
	"Fv, zl serraq, gurl fnl zrrlbj, zrrlbj!"
%
N Arj Lbexre vf evqvat qbja gur ebnq va uvf arj Zreprqrf.  Fb vagrag vf ur
ba gur pbpnvar va uvf unaq ur pbzcyrgryl zvffrf n ghea naq uvf pne cyhatrf
bire gur svir-uhaqerq-sbbg pyvss gb or fznfurq vagb cvrprf ng gur obggbz.
Nf gur ba-ybbxref ehfu gb gur rqtr bs gur pyvss gurl frr uvz svsgl srrg
sebz gur gbc bs gur pyvss pyvatvat gb n fghagrq ohfu jvgu nyy uvf fgeratgu.
"Qrne Ybeq," ur cenlf, "V arire nfxrq lbh sbe abguva' orsber, ohg V'z nfxva'
lbh abj: Fnir zr, Ybeq, fnir zr."
	Obbzf gur Ybeq: "YRG TB BS GUR OENAPU."
	"Ohg Ybeq, vs V qb gung, V'yy snyy!"
	"GEHFG ZR, YRG TB BS GUR OENAPU."
	"Ohg Ybeq, V'z tbaan snyy naq qvr..."
	"GEHFG ZR GB FNIR LBH.  YRG TB BS GUR OENAPU."
	Bxnl, Ybeq, V'yy gehfg lbh, urer V...  urer V tb!"  Naq ur snyyf
gb uvf qrngu.
	"QHZO LNAXRR."
%
	N Cbyr, n Fbivrg, na Nzrevpna, na Ratyvfuzna naq n Pnanqvna jrer ybfg
va n sberfg va gur qrnq bs jvagre.  Nf gurl jrer fvggvat nebhaq n sver, gurl
abgvprq n cnpx bs jbyirf rlrvat gurz uhatevyl.
	Gur Ratyvfuzna ibyhagrrerq gb fnpevsvpr uvzfrys sbe gur erfg bs gur
cnegl.  Ur jnyxrq bhg vagb gur avtug.
	Gur Nzrevpna, abg jnagvat gb or bhgqbar ol na Ratyvfuzna, bssrerq gb
or gur arkg ivpgvz.  Gur jbyirf rntreyl npprcgrq uvf bssre, naq qribherq uvz,
gbb.
	Gur Fbivrg, oryvrivat uvzfrys gb or orggre guna nal Nzrevpna, ghearq
gb gur Cbyr naq fnlf, "Jryy, pbzenqr, V funyy ibyhagrre gb tvir zl yvsr gb
fnir n sryybj fbpvnyvfg."  Ur yrnirf gur furygre naq tbrf bhg gb or xvyyrq ol
gur jbys cnpx.
	Ng guvf cbvag, gur Cbyr bcrarq uvf wnpxrg naq chyyf bhg n znpuvar tha.
Ur gnxrf nvz va gur trareny qverpgvba bs gur jbys cnpx naq va n srj frpbaqf
unf xvyyrq gurz nyy.
	Gur Pnanqvna nfxrq gur Cbyr, "Jul qvqa'g lbh qb gung orsber gur bguref
jrag bhg gb or xvyyrq?
	Gur Cbyr chyyf n obggyr bs ibqxn sebz gur bgure fvqr bs uvf wnpxrg.
Ur fzvyrf naq ercyvrf, "Svir zra ba bar obggyr -- gbb znal."
%
N Fpbgfzna pynq va n xvyg jnyxf hc gb gur pbhagre va na Ncbgurpnel.  Sebz
uvf cbpxrg ur gnxrf n cynvq pbaqbz gung unf orra urnivyl hfrq, gbea, cngpurq,
frja, naq vf pheeragyl fcyvg qbja bar fvqr.  Ur nfxf gur cebcevrgre, "Ubj zhpu
gb ercynpr guvf, Vna?"  Gur cebcevrgre fnlf, "Jul, Nathf, gung'y or sbhe
crapr."  Gura gur Fpbgfzna nfxf, "Ubj zhpu gb ercnve?"  Gur cebc. ybbxf gur
pbaqbz bire pnershyyl, naq fnlf "Guerr crapr gb ercnve."  Gur Fpbgfzna cbaqref
sbe n zbzrag, gura fnlf, "V'yy or onpx."
	Yngre va gur qnl, gur Fpbgfzna ergheaf jvgu n fzvyr ba uvf snpr naq
fnlf, "Vna, gur Ertvzrag unf ibgrq gb ercnve!"
%
N furevss neevirq ng gur fprar bs gur ubeevoyr nppvqrag whfg nf uvf qrchgl,
nyy nybar, jnf pyvzovat qbja sebz gur pbagebyf bs n ohyyqbmre.  "Fnl,
Whavbe, jung'f tbva' ba?" nfxrq gur furevss.
	"N ohf shyy bs zvtenag jbexref jrag bhg bs pbageby naq bire gur
pyvss, naq V whfg svavfurq ohelva' 'rz," rkcynvarq gur qrchgl.
	"Tbbq jbex, obl," ercyvrq gur furevss.  "Cerggl tbel jbex -- jrer
nyy bs 'rz qrnq?"
	Whavbe abqqrq fnqyl naq fnvq, "Fbzr bs gurz fnvq gurl jrera'g, ohg
lbh xabj ubj gurz Zrk'pnaf yvr."
%
N grnpure naabhaprf gb ure pynff, "Puvyqera, gur fghqrag jub pna anzr gur
terngrfg zna jub rire yvirq jvyy jva n fuval erq nccyr."
	Vzzrqvngryl na Vgnyvna obl envfrf uvf unaq.
	"Lrf, Gbal?"
	"Puevfgbcure Pbyhzohf!" fnlf Gbal.
	"Jryy," fnlf gur grnpure, "Puevfgbcure Pbyhzohf jnf n irel terng zna,
ohg V qba'g guvax ur jnf gur terngrfg zna jub rire yvirq."
	Sebz gur onpx bs gur ebbz yvggyr Oreavr Tbyqfgrva envfrf uvf unaq.
	"Lrf, Oreavr?"
	"Wrfhf Puevfg", fnlf Oreavr.
	"Gung vf pbeerpg, Oreavr," cebabhaprf gur grnpure.  "Naq urer vf
lbhe nccyr."
	Jura Oreavr trgf hc gb gur sebag bs gur ebbz gb pynvz uvf cevmr,
gur grnpure fnlf, "Oreavr, tvira gur snpg gung lbh'er Wrjvfu, V'z fhecevfrq
gung lbh gubhtug Wrfhf jnf gur terngrfg zna jub rire yvirq."
	"Jryy, npghnyyl," ercyvrf Oreavr, "V qb guvax Zbfrf unq gur rqtr,
ohg ohfvarff vf ohfvarff."
%
N Grkna, vzcerffvat gur uryy bhg bs n Obfgbavna jvgu gnyrf nobhg gur urebrf
bs gur Nynzb, pbzzragrq, "V'yy org lbh arire unq nalbar gung oenir nebhaq
*Obfgba*."
	"Rire urne bs Cnhy Erirer?", faneyrq gur Obfgbavna.
	"Cnhy Erirer?", cbaqrerq gur Grkna.  "Vfa'g ur gur thl jub ena sbe
uryc?"
%
Nygubhtu n svsgu-trarengvba Nzrevpna, Sngure Fjrral jnf zber Vevfu guna zbfg
bs Reva'f angvirf.  Ur fcbxr jvgu na Vevfu oebthr juvpu unq zlfgrevbhfyl
nccrnerq qhevat uvf avargrragu lrne naq ur *ungrq* gur Ratyvfu.  Qhr gb uvf
cebpyvivgl gb orynobe gur Oevgvfu sebz uvf chycvg, pbzcynvagf gb uvf
fhcrevbef jrer abg vaserdhrag.  Ur jbhyq oynzr nalguvat rivy be zreryl
vapbairavrag ba gur Ratyvfu crbcyr.  Vs gurer jnf na npg bs greebevfz, gur
erfcbafvovyvgl jnf cebzcgyl ynvq ng gur srrg bs gur Oevgf.  Vs gurer jnf n
angheny qvfnfgre, haqbhogrqyl gur Ratyvfu tbireazrag jnf na npprffbel gb
gur snpg, vs abg bhgevtugyl phycnoyr.  Ercrngrqyl, uvf fhcrevbef pnyyrq uvz
ba gur pnecrg sbe uvf orunivbe.  Nsgre n cnegvphyneyl ivghcrengvir
nagv-Oevgvfu oebnqfvqr, gur Ovfubc vafgehpgrq Sngure Fjrral gb pbzr fgenvtug
gb uvf bssvpr; qb abg cnff TB; qb abg pbyyrpg gjb uhaqerq qbyynef.  Fhzzvat
hc n uhzvyvngvat naq fbhy-znexvat ercevznaq, gur Ovfubc raqrq jvgu: "Arkg
jrrx vf Fnvag Cngevpx'f Qnl.  Vs lbh fb zhpu nf *zragvba* gur Oevgvfu, vg'f
lbhe ynfg frezba!"

Gur sbyybjvat Fhaqnl, nf Sngure Fjrral fcbxr ybivatyl naq rybdhragyl bs
Fnvag Cngevpx, naq ur znqr n ersrerapr gb gur ynfg Cnffbire pryroengrq ol
Puevfg naq Uvf qvfpvcyrf.  "Fher, na' lbh'er nyy snzvyvne jvgu gur gnyr.
Lbh xabj gung Bhe Ybeq fng ng gur gnoyr naq gbyq uvf qvfpvcyrf gung bar
nzbat gurz jbhyq orgenl Uvz.  Nf Ur ybbxrq nebhaq gur gnoyr, Ur fgbccrq ng
Crgre, gur Ebpx, jub fnvq, `Abg V, Ybeq!'  Ur ybbxrq ng Gubznf, jub qbhogrq,
naq Gubznf fnvq, `V pbhyq arire qb fhpu n guvat!'  Gura gur Ybeq ybbxrq ybat
naq uneq ng Whqnf Vfpnevbg, jub fnvq, `Pbe, oybvzl, Thi'an, lbh pbhyqa'g
znva znl!'"
%
Nzrevpn unf orra qvfpbirerq orsber, ohg vg unf nyjnlf orra uhfurq hc.
		-- Bfpne Jvyqr
%
Nzrevpn vf n ynetr, sevraqyl qbt va n irel fznyy ebbz.  Rirel gvzr vg
jntf vgf gnvy, vg xabpxf bire n punve.
		-- Neabyq Wbfrcu Gblaorr
%
Nzrevpn vf n zrygvat cbg.  Lbh xabj, jurer gubfr ba gur obggbz trg ohearq,
naq gur fphz evfrf gb gur gbc.
		-- Hgnu Cuvyyvcf
%
	Nzrevpn, Ehffvn naq Wncna ner fraqvat hc n gjb lrne fuhggyr zvffvba
jvgu bar nfgebanhg sebz rnpu pbhagel.  Fvapr vg'f tbvat gb or gjb ybat, ybaryl
lrnef hc gurer, rnpu znl oevat nal sbez bs ragregnvazrag jrvtuvat 150 cbhaqf
be yrff.  Gur Nzrevpna nccebnpurf gur ANFN obneq naq nfxf gb gnxr uvf 125 yo.
jvsr. Gurl nccebir.
	Gur Wncnarfr nfgebanhg fnlf, "V'ir nyjnlf jnagrq gb yrnea Yngva.  V
jnag 100 yof. bs grkgobbxf."  Gur ANFN obneq nccebirf.  Gur Ehffvna nfgebanhg
guvaxf sbe n frpbaq naq fnlf, "Gjb lrnef...  nyy evtug, V jnag 150 cbhaqf bs
gur orfg Phona pvtnef rire znqr."   Ntnva, ANFN bxnlf vg.
	Gjb lrnef yngre, gur fuhggyr ynaqf naq rirelbar vf tngurerq bhgfvqr
gb jrypbzr onpx gur nfgebanhgf.  Jryy, vg'f boivbhf jung gur Nzrevpna'f orra
hc gb, ur naq uvf jvsr ner rnpu ubyqvat na vasnag.  Gur pebjq purref.  Gur
Wncnarfr nfgebanhg fgrcf bhg naq znxrf n 10 zvahgr fcrrpu va nofbyhgryl
cresrpg Yngva.  Gur pebjq qbrfa'g haqrefgnaq n jbeq bs vg, ohg gurl'er
vzcerffrq naq gurl purre ntnva.  Gur Ehffvna nfgebanhg fgbzcf bhg, pyrapurf
gur cbqvhz hagvy uvf xahpxyrf ghea juvgr, tynerf ng gur svefg ebj naq
fpernzf: "Nalobql tbg n zngpu?"
%
[Nzrevpnaf] ner n enpr bs pbaivpgf naq bhtug gb or gunaxshy sbe nalguvat
jr nyybj gurz fubeg bs unatvat.
		-- Fnzhry Wbuafba

Nzrevpn vf n ynetr sevraqyl qbt va n fznyy ebbz.  Rirel gvzr vg jntf vgf
gnvy vg xabpxf bire n punve.
		-- Neabyq Gblaorr

Gur Havgrq Fgngrf vf yvxr gur thl ng gur cnegl jub tvirf pbpnvar gb
rirelobql naq fgvyy abobql yvxrf uvz.
		-- Wvz Fnzhryf
%
Na Nttvr snezre jnf yvsgvat uvf ubtf, bar ol bar, hc gb gur oenapurf bs
uvf nccyr gerrf gb tenmr ba gur nccyrf.  N Grknf fghqrag jnyxrq ol naq
nfxrq uvz, "Qbrfa'g gung gnxr n ybg bs gvzr?"
	Ercyvrq gur Nttvr, "Jung'f gvzr gb n ubt?"
%
Na Nzrevpna ohfvarffzna va Ybaqba jnf tvira fcrpvny ivfvgbe'f cevivyrtrf ng na
rkpyhfvir zra'f pyho.  Fgevqvat va bar nsgreabba, gur Nzrevpna nccebnpurq gur
bayl bgure zna va gur ybhatr naq gevrq gb fgevxr hc n pbairefngvba.  "Pner
sbe n pvtne?" ur nfxrq.
	"Ab, gunax lbh," gur Ratyvfuzna ercyvrq.  "V gevrq fzbxvat bapr naq
qvqa'g yvxr vg."
	"Jbhyq lbh pner gb wbva zr va gur one sbe n qevax, gura?" gur
ohfvarffzna nfxrq.
	"Ab, gunax lbh.  V gevrq qevaxvat bapr naq vg qvqa'g nterr jvgu zr."
	"Jryy, ubj nobhg n tnzr bs ovyyvneqf?"
	"Fbeel.  V gevrq vg bapr naq pbhyqa'g frrz gb trg gur unat bs vg."
	Nf gur Nzrevpna fgnegrq gb ghea njnl, gur Ratyvfuzna fnvq, "Ohg zl
fba jvyy or urer fubegyl, naq V'z fher ur jbhyq rawbl n tnzr jvgu lbh."
	"Lbhe fba?  Na bayl puvyq, V cerfhzr."
%
Na Nzrevpna pbhcyr vf va Cnevf, n zhpu njnvgrq gevc, jura fhqqrayl gur jvsr
qvrf bs n urneg nggnpx.  Gur uhfonaq qrpvqrf gb unir ure ohevrq gurer nf gur
ivfvg gb Senapr jnf fbzrguvat gurl unq ybatrq sbe sbe znal lrnef.  Nyy
neenatrzragf ner znqr jura ur fhqqrayl ernyvmrf gung ur qbrfa'g unir n oynpx
ung sbe gur shareny.  Gur ubgry pbapvretr gryyf uvz gung jung ur jnagf vf n
"puncrnh abve."  Fb bss ur tbrf gb svaq n fgber bcra yngr.
	Svefg ur zrrgf n traqnezr naq va uvf senpgherq Serapu nfxf, "Z'fvrhe,
bh cbhinvf-wr npurgre ha pncrnh abve?"
	Gur cbyvprzna vf n ovg fhecevfrq ohg, nsgre guvaxvat n ovg, tvirf bhe
sevraq qverpgvbaf.  Gur fgber -- vs gung vf jung vg vf -- ybbxf n yvggyr frrql
naq eha qbja, ohg gur zna oruvaq gur pbhagre ybbxf sevraqyl fb va tbrf bhe
ureb.  Ur fcrnxf svefg:
	"Z'fvrhe, wr irhk npurgre ha pncrnh abve."
	"Znvf, zbafvrhe, w'nv qrf pncrnhk ebhtrf, qrf pncrnhk oynapf, rg qrf
pncrnhk zneebaf, znvf cnf qrf pncrnhk abverf.  Cbhedhbv nirm ibhf orfbva q'ha
pncrnh abve?"
	"Zn srzzr rfg zbegr."
	"B Zbafvrhe!  Dhryyr ornh fragvzrag!"
%
	Na Nzrevpna gbhevfg jrag vagb n erfgnhenag va n Fcnavfu cebivapvny 
pvgl naq nfxrq gb or freirq gur fcrpvnygl bs gur ubhfr.  Jura gur qvfu
neevirq ur nfxrq jung xvaq bs zrng vg pbagnvarq.  "Gurfr, frabe," rkcynvarq
gur jnvgre va unygvat Ratyvfu, "ner gur pbwbarf -- gur, jung lbh fnl, gur
grfgvpyrf -- bs gur ohyy xvyyrq va gur evat gbqnl.
	Gur gbhevfg thycrq ohg gnfgrq gur qvfu naq sbhaq vg qryvpvbhf.
Ergheavat gur sbyybjvat riravat, ur nfxrq sbe gur fnzr qvfu.  Jura vg jnf 
freirq, ur pbzzragrq gb gur jnvgre, "Ohg gurfr -- gurfr pbwbarf -- ner
zhpu fznyyre guna gur barf V unq lrfgreqnl."
	"Gehr, frabe, ohg gur ohyy -- ur qbrf abg NYJNLF ybfr."
%
Na Nzrevpna jnyxf vagb na Vevfu cho nebhaq yhapugvzr, naq svaqf gur cynpr
vf pbzcyrgryl svyyrq naq gurer ner ab punvef ninvynoyr, jvgu gur rkprcgvba
bs bar -- frngvat n Puvuhnuhn arkg gb n jbzna.  Ur irel cbyvgryl nfxf ure
vs fur jbhyq zvaq cynpvat ure qbt ba gur sybbe sbe n srj zvahgrf juvyr ur
tbg n dhvpx ovgr gb rng.
	"V zbfg pregnvayl jbhyq!", gur jbzna unhtugvyl ercyvrf.  "Yvggyr
Svsv *nyjnlf* fvgf arkg gb zr ng yhapugvzr naq gurer fur jvyy fgnl!"
	Jurerhcba, gur Nzrevpna cvpxf hc gur Puvuhnuhn, guebjf vg bhg bs
na bcra jvaqbj naq gnxrf gur frng.
	Na Vevfuzna, jngpuvat gur jubyr rapbhagre, jnyxf bire, gncf gur
Nzrevpna ba gur fubhyqre naq fnlf, "Zngr, V thrff V arire jvyy haqrefgnaq
lbh Nzrevpnaf.  Lbh qevax lbhe orre pbyq, qevir ba gur evtug fvqr bs gur
fgerrg, naq lbh whfg guerj gur jebat ovgpu bhg gur jvaqbj!"
%
	Na Ratyvfuzna, n Serapuzna naq na Nzrevpna ner pncgherq ol pnaavonyf.
Gur yrnqre bs gur gevor pbzrf hc gb gurz naq fnlf, "Rira gubhtu lbh ner nobhg
gb xvyyrq, lbhe qrnguf jvyy abg or va inva.  Rirel cneg bs lbhe obql jvyy or
hfrq.  Lbhe syrfu jvyy or rngra, sbe zl crbcyr ner uhatel.  Lbhe unve jvyy or
jbira vagb pybguvat, sbe zl crbcyr ner anxrq.  Lbhe obarf jvyy or tebhaq hc
naq znqr vagb zrqvpvar, sbe zl crbcyr ner fvpx.  Lbhe fxva jvyy or fgergpurq
bire pnabr senzrf, sbe zl crbcyr arrq genafcbegngvba.  Jr ner n snve crbcyr,
naq jr bssre lbh n punapr gb xvyy lbhefrys jvgu bhe prerzbavny xavsr."
	Gur Ratyvfuzna npprcgf gur xavsr naq lryyf, "Tbq Fnir gur Dhrra",
juvyr cyhatvat gur xavsr vagb uvf urneg.
 	Gur Serapuzna erzbirf gur xavsr sebz gur snyyra obql, naq lryyf,
"Ivir yn Senapr", juvyr cyhatvat gur xavsr vagb uvf urneg.  
	Gur Nzrevpna erzbirf gur xavsr sebz gur snyyra obql, naq lryyf,
juvyr fgnoovat uvzfrys nyy bire uvf obql, "Urer'f lbhe ybhfl pnabr!"
%
	Na Vfenryv fbyqvre jnf purpxvat geniryref' cncref ba n ebnq, jura n 
zna naq n urnivyl certanag jbzna ba n qbaxrl pnzr ol.  "Lbhe anzrf cyrnfr?" 
fnvq gur gur fbyqvre.
	"Zl anzr vf Znel," fnvq gur jbzna.  
	"Naq zvar vf Wbfrcu," fnvq gur zna.  
	"Bu," fnvq gur fbyqvre, n yvggyr gnxra nonpx, "Naq jurer ner lbh
tbvat?"
	"Gb Orguyrurz."
	"Lbhe ernfba sbe tbvat gurer?" 
	"Gb cnl bhe gnkrf gb gur tbireazrag."
	"Gryy zr," fnvq gur fbyqvre, "ner lbh tbvat gb anzr gur onol Wrfhf?"
	"Bs pbhefr abg," fnvq gur jbzna, "Jung qb lbh guvax jr ner, Chregb 
Evpnaf?"
%
Na byq Wrjvfu zna ernqf nobhg Rvafgrva'f gurbel bs eryngvivgl
va gur arjfcncre naq nfxf uvf fpvragvfg tenaqfba gb rkcynva vg gb uvz.
	"Jryy, mnlqn, vg'f fbeg bs yvxr guvf.  Rvafgrva fnlf gung vs
lbh'er univat lbhe grrgu qevyyrq jvgubhg Abibpnva, n zvahgr frrzf yvxr
na ubhe.  Ohg vs lbh'er fvggvat jvgu n ornhgvshy jbzna ba lbhe ync, na
ubhe frrzf yvxr n zvahgr."
	Gur byq zna pbafvqref guvf cebsbhaq ovg bs guvaxvat sbe n
zbzrag naq fnlf, "Naq sebz guvf ur znxrf n yvivat?"
		-- Neguhe Anvzna, "Rirel Tbl'f Thvqr gb Lvqqvfu"
%
Nf na Ratyvfuzna, na Nhffvr naq n Fpbgfzna ner fvggvat va n cho, dhnssvat
n srj, guerr syvrf ohmm qbja sebz gur prvyvat naq ynmvyl pvepyr rnpu qevaxre.
Fhqqrayl "ohmmmmmmmmcybbbc", rnpu syl qbrf n xnznxnmv qvir vagb n qvssrerag
tynff.
	Gur Ratyvfuzna gnxr n qvfthfgrq ybbx ng uvf cvag, qvcf gur syl bhg
jvgu n fcbba,  syvpxf gur syl bire uvf fubhyqre, naq qenvaf gur tynff.
	Gur Nhffvr abgvprf gur syl nf ur chgf gur tynff gb uvf yvcf.  Jvgu
n dhvpx chss ur oybjf gur oht bhg va n pybhq bs sbnz, naq gbffrf gur orre
qbja va bar thyc.
	Gura, nf gurl obgu ybbx ba, njrfgehpx, gur Fpbgfzna tragyl tenfcf gur
syl ol vgf jvatf, yvsgf vg bhg bs uvf oerj naq funxrf vg bss.  Gura, va n
svez ibvpr ur fcrnxf gb gur syl: "Gurer l'ner abj ynqqvr, fnsr naq fbhaq.
ABJ FCVG VG BBBBG!"
%
"Ng n erprag zrrgvat va Fabjznff, Pbybenqb, n cnegvpvcnag sebz Ybf
Natryrf snvagrq sebz ulcrebkltrangvba, naq jr unq gb ubyq uvf urnq
haqre gur rkunhfg bs n ohf hagvy ur erivirq."
%
Onpx va gur tbbq byr qnlf va Grknf, jura fgntrpbnpurf naq gur yvxr jnf
cbchyne, gurer jrer guerr crbcyr va n fgntrpbnpu bar qnl:  n gehr erq-
oybbqrq obea naq oerq Grknf tragyrzna, n graqresbbg pvgl-fyvpxre sebz
onpx Rnfg, naq n ornhgvshy naq jryy-raqbjrq Grknf ynql.  Gur pvgl-fyvpxre
xrcg rlrvat gur ynql, naq svanyyl ur yrnarq sbejneq naq fnvq, "Ynql, V'yy
tvir lbh $10 sbe n oybj wbo."  

Gur Grknf tragyrzna ybbxrq nccnyyrq, chyyrq bhg uvf cvfgby, naq
xvyyrq gur pvgl-fyvpxre ba gur fcbg.  Gur ynql tnfcrq naq fnvq, "Gunax
lbh, fhu, sbe qrsraqva' znu ubabe!"

Jurerhcba gur Grkna ubyfgrerq uvf tha naq fnvq, "Lbhe ubabe, uryy!  
Ab graqresbbg vf tbaan pbzr 'ebhaq urer envfva' gur cevpr bs jbzra va Grknf!"
%
Oreaneq jnf n lbhat rvtugl-guerr, abg n tbzre, naq noyr gb gnyx.  Ur'q orra
genafsreerq sebz ZOU (Zna'f Orfg Ubfcvgny), gur Ubhfr'f Eviny.  Sbhaqrq va
Pbybavny gvzrf ol gur JNFCf, gur vafrzvangvba bs ZOU ol aba-JNFCf unq gnxra
cynpr bayl zvq-gjragvrgu praghel jvgu gur gbxra zhygvqrkgebhf Bevragny
fhetrba, naq svanyyl, jvgu gur gbxra erq-ubg vagreany-zrqvpvar Wrj.  Lrg,
ZOU jnf fgvyy Oebbxf Oebguref, juvyr gur Ubhfr jnf fgvyy gur Tnezrag Qvfgevpg.
Sbe Wrjf ng ZOU gur cnffjbeq jnf "Qerff Oevgvfu, Guvax Lvqqvfu."  Vg jnf
ener gb trg n GHES sebz gur ZOU gb gur Ubhfr, naq gur Sng Zna jnf phevbhf:
"Oreaneq, lbh jrag gb gur ZOU, gurl qvq n terng jbex-hc, naq lbh gbyq gurz,
nsgre gurl tbg qbar, lbh jnagrq gb or genafsreerq urer. Jul?"
	"V evyyl qba'g xabj," fnvq Oreaneq.
	"Jnf vg gur qbpgbef gurer? Gur qbpgbef lbh qvqa'g yvxr?"
	"Gur qbpghf?  Anu, gur qbpghf V pna'g pbzcynva."
	"Gur grfg be gur ebbz?"
	"Gur grfgf be gur ebbz?  Iryy, anu, nobhg gurz V pna'g pbzcynva."
	"Gur ahefrf? Gur sbbq?" nfxrq Sngf, ohg Oreaneq fubbx uvf urnq ab.
Sngf ynhturq naq fnvq, "Yvfgra , Oreavr, lbh jrag gb gur ZOU, gurl qvq guvf
terng jbexhc, naq jura V nfxrq lbh jul lbh pnzr gb gur Ubhfr bs Tbq, nyy lbh
gryy zr vf, 'Anu, V pna'g pbzcynva.'  Fb jul qvq lbh pbzr urer?  Jul, Oreavr,
jul?"
	"Iul V pbzr urnu?  Iryy, fnvq Oreavr, "Urnu V pna pbzcynva."
		-- Ubhfr bs Tbq
%
Ovatb, tnf fgngvba, unzohetre jvgu n fvqr beqre bs nvecynar abvfr,
naq lbh'yy or Tnel, Vaqvnan.
		-- Wrffvr, "Ternfre'f Cnynpr"
%
Obneq gur jvaqbjf, hc lbhe pne vafhenapr, naq qba'g yrnir nal obbmr va cynva
fvtug.  Vg'f Fg. Cngevpx'f qnl va Puvpntb ntnva.  Gur yrtraq unf vg gung Fg.
Cngevpx qebir gur fanxrf bhg bs Verynaq.  Va snpg, ur jnf neerfgrq sbe qehax
qevivat.  Gur fanxrf yrsg orpnhfr crbcyr xrcg guebjvat hc ba gurz.
%
Pnyvsbeavn vf n svar cynpr gb yvir -- vs lbh unccra gb or na benatr.
		-- Serq Nyyra
%
Pnyvsbeavnaf ner n fgenatr crbcyr.  Gurl'yy chg rirel purzvpny xabja gb Tbq
naq zna hc gurve abfgevyf naq gura ynhtu ng lbh sbe chggvat fhtne va lbhe
pbssrr.
%
"Pnyyvat W-Zna Xvax.  Pnyyvat W-Zna Xvax.  Unfu zvffvyr fvtugrq, gnetrg
Ybf Natryrf.  Qvfertneq crefbany srryvatf nobhg pvgl naq vagreprcg."
%
Pnyiva:	"V jbaqre jurer jr tb jura jr qvr."
Uboorf:	"Cvggfohetu?"
Pnyiva:	"Lbh zrna vs jr'er tbbq be vs jr'er onq?"
%
Pnanqn vf fb fdhner rira gur srznyr vzcrefbangbef ner jbzra.
		-- Sebz gur zbivr "Bhgentrbhf"
%
Puvpntb unf wbheanyvfgf' onef, rguavp onef, arvtuobeubbq onef, rira zvqtrg
onef, uhaqerqf, znlor gubhfnaqf bs onef, ba ba rirel arvtuobeubbq oybpx.
V jnf qevaxvat ba nsgreabba va B'Ebhexr'f, n one ba gur Arne Abegu fvqr.
Vg jnf qnex naq rzcgl, juvpu fhvgrq zl zbbq.  N sng, fghooyr-orneqrq,
zvqqyr-ntrq zna jnqqyrq va, gbbx gur fgbby arkg gb zvar, naq beqrerq n
orre.  Ur jnf pbzcyrgryl haerznexnoyr, rkprcg gung ur jnf qerffrq, urnq
gb gbr, va n juvgr-ynpr jrqqvat tbja.  Nsgre n fvyrapr, V fnvq, "Orra gb
n jrqqvat?"
	Ur oehfurq onpx uvf irvy, ehfgyrq uvf crggvpbngf naq fnvq, "Hu...
lrnu."
	Ur fvyragyl svavfurq uvf qevax naq yrsg.  Gur onegraqre fnvq, "Lbh
xabj, rira gur genafirfgvgrf va guvf gbja unir svir b'pybpx funqbjf."
%
Puvpntbna:	"Fb, jurer'er lbh sebz?"
Ubbfvre:	"Jung'f jebat jvgu Vaqvnan?"
%
"Pyrirynaq?  Lrf, V fcrag n jrrx gurer bar qnl."
%
Qnyynf fgvyy yvirf.  Tbq ZHFG or qrnq.
%
Senapr vf n pbhagel jurer gur zbarl snyyf ncneg naq lbh pna'g grne
gur gbvyrg cncre.
		-- Ovyyl Jvyqre
%
Ubj pna lbh fnl gung gur jbeyq vfa'g Wrjvfu, jura gur fha'f erny anzr vf Fby?
%
Ubj fubhyq gurl nafjre?
		-- Novtnvy Ina Ohera (Qrne Nool) va ercyl gb gur dhrfgvba
		"Jul qb Wrjf nyjnlf nafjre n dhrfgvba jvgu n dhrfgvba?"
%
V nz Nzrevpn'f puvyq, n fcnfgvp fybttvat ba qrzragrq
yvzof qebbyvat V'yy genqr zl CuQ sbe n gryrcubar ibvpr.
		-- Oheg Ynavre Fnssbeq VVV, "Na Bofpherq Enqvnapr"
%
V terj hc va na Vgnyvna snzvyl, lbh xabj, gur fgenatr guvat nobhg
Vgnyvnaf -- gurl'er fb Wrjvfu.
		-- Xnl Onyyneq
%
V unir whfg rabhtu juvgr va zr gb znxr zl ubarfgl dhrfgvbanoyr.
		-- Jvyy Ebtref
%
V xabj jul gur fha arire frgf ba gur Oevgvfu Rzcver -- Tbq jbhyqa'g gehfg
na Ratyvfuzna va gur qnex.
		-- Qhapna Fcnrgu
%
V zneevrq na Vgnyvna tvey; gur jnl lbh zneel na Vgnyvna tvey va zl snzvyl
vf gb oevat n Arj Lbexre ubzr svefg.
%
V arire oryvrirq va Fnagn Pynhf orpnhfr V xarj ab juvgr qhqr jbhyq pbzr
vagb zl arvtuobeubbq nsgre qnex.
		-- Qvpx Tertbel
%
V jnf 15 lrnef byq orsber V sbhaq bhg gung "qnza lnaxrr" jnf gjb jbeqf.
%
Vs Tbq unq zrnag sbe Grknaf gb fxv ur jbhyq unir znqr ohyyfuvg juvgr.
%
Vs V unq n cynagngvba va Trbetvn naq n ubzr va Uryy, V'q fryy gur cynagngvba
naq tb ubzr.
		-- Rhtrar C. Tnyynture
%
Vs gurer ernyyl jnf n Wrjvfu pbafcvenpl gb eha gur jbeyq, zl enoov jbhyq
unir yrg zr va ba vg ol abj.  V pbagevohgr rabhtu gb gur fuhyr.
		-- Fnhy Tbbqzna
%
Vs lbh yvir va Arj Lbex, rira vs lbh'er Pngubyvp, lbh'er Wrjvfu.
		-- Yraal Oehpr
%
Va gur ebznagvp qnlf bs Jnefnj, Ivraarfr juberf jrer xabja sbe gurve
ornhgl naq qryvpnpl.  N tnyynag bssvpre cvpxrq hc bar fhpu ynql bs gur
riravat, jub gbbx uvz gb ure ncnegzrag.  Gurl znqr qryvpvbhf ybir nyy
riravat orsber qevsgvat gb fyrrc va rnpu bguref' nezf.  Va gur zbeavat
gur zna qerffrq, fgnevat vagb n shyy-yratgu zveebe.  Gur ynql ynl va ure
orq jngpuvat uvz.  Svanyyl, fur fnvq fbsgyl,
	"Qvqa'g lbh sbetrg fbzrguvat?"
	"Jung qvq V sbetrg?" nfxrq gur bssvpre.
	"Lbh sbetbg nobhg gur zbarl," fnvq gur ynql.
	"Bu, ab," fnvq gur zna, fgnaqvat ng enzebq nggragvba. "N Cbyvfu
bssvpre arire npprcgf zbarl."
%
Vfenryv cevzr zvavfgre Funzve vaivgrq gur Cbcr gb cynl n ebhaq bs tbys.  Fvapr
gur Cbcr unqa'g gur snvagrfg bs na vqrn ubj gb cynl, ur pbairarq gur pbyyrtr bs
pneqvanyf gb nfx gurve nqivpr.  "Pnyy Neabyq Cnyzre," gurl fhttrfgrq, "znxr uvz
n pneqvany naq yrg uvz cynl va lbhe cynpr.  Gryy Funzve lbh pbhyqa'g znxr vg."
	Ubaberq ol Uvf Ubyvarff' erdhrfg, Cnyzre nterrq gb ercerfrag uvz.
Jura ur erghearq sebz gur zngpu, gur Cbcr nfxrq uvz ubj ur unq qbar.  "V pnzr
va frpbaq," Cnyzre ercyvrq.
	"Lbh zrna gb gryy zr Funzve orng lbh?"
	"Ab, Lbhe Ubyvarff.  Enoov Avpxynhf qvq."
%
Vg frrzf gung n Fpbgfzna naq na Vevfuzna jnyxrq vagb n one.  Gur Fpbg
vzzrqvngryl fvatyrq bhg gur onegraqre naq cebpynvzrq gung qevaxf jrer
ba gur ubhfr, naq gung ur rkcrpgrq uvz gb freir bayl uvf orfg.  Gur arkg
qnl, gur urnqyvarf ernq: Vevfu Iragevybdhvfg Orngra gb Qrngu Oruvaq One.
%
	Vg jnf va n one va zvqgbja Znaunggna naq gur Serapuzna naq gur
Nzrevpna jrer gnyxvat nobhg ybir bire fbzr qel Znegvavf.  "Qrrq lbh xabj,
fve," gur Serapuzna fnvq, "gung rra zl pbhagel gunve ner 79 qvssrerag
jnlf ubj gb znxr gur ERNY, cnffvbangr yhss?"
	"Qb gryy?" fnvq gur Nzrevpna.  "Jryy, gung'f nznmvat.  Va guvf
pbhagel gurer'f bayl bar."
	"Whfg bar?" gur Serapuzna fnvq, pbaqrfpraqvatyl.  "Naq jung rrm
gung?"
	"Jryy, gurer'f n zna naq n jbzna, naq --"
	"Fnper oyrh!!" rkpynvzrq gur Serapuzna.  "Ahzonve 80!"
%
Vg jnf gur svefg qnl bs n arj grez ng Cevaprgba, naq n Grknf N&Z serfuzna
jnf yrneavat uvf jnl nebhaq gur pnzchf.  Fgbccvat n qvfgvathvfurq ybbxvat
hccrepynffzna, ur vadhverq,
	"Fnl, ohqql, pna lbh gryy zr jurer gur yvoenel vf ng?"
	"Zl tbbq sryybj," pnzr gur ercyl, "ng Cevaprgba jr qb abg raq bhe
fragraprf jvgu n cercbfvgvba."
	"Nyy evtug," fnvq gur serfuzna, "pna lbh gryy zr jurer gur yvoenel
vf ng, nffubyr?"
%
	Vg'f zvqavtug.  Gur byq zna vf njnxr, areibhfyl cnpvat gur sybbe, nf
uvf 20-lrne-byq fba pbzrf va.
	"Junggn lbh zrna?  Lbh fgnln bhg nyyn avtug, lbh ehaan nebhaq jvqqn
ohzf.  Junggn lbh gelvat gb qb?"
	"Cncn, qba'g gnyx yvxr gung," ercyvrf gur obl.
	"Jub-n lbh, gryyn zr abggn gnyxn yvxr gung?  Lbh ab jbex, lbh
punfr-n onq jbzra, junggn orpbzr bs lbh?"
	"Cncn, *cyrnfr* qba'g gnyx yvxr gung."
	"Qba'gn gnyxn yvxr gung?  Junggn lbh zrna?  Jul fubhyqa'g V gnyxn
yvxxn gung?"
	"Cncn, jr'er abg Vgnyvna."
%
Vg'f abg n fva abg gb or Vevfu, ohg vg vf n terng funzr.
		-- Frna B'Uhvtvaa
%
	"Wrna, jung vf guvf nggenpgvba orgjrra Pngubyvp tveyf naq Wrjvfu zra?"
	"Lbh ernyyl jnag gb xabj?"
	"Lrnu."
	"Jryy, Pneby, Wrjvfu zra ner terng va orq... evtug, Obo?  Naq Pngubyvp
tveyf shpx yvxr ohaavrf."
%
Wrjf nyjnlf xabj gjb guvatf: fhssrevat naq jurer gb svaq terng Puvarfr sbbq.
		-- Sebz gur zbivr "Zl Snibevgr Lrne".
%
Xnafnf, jurer gur zra ner zra, gur furrc ner fpnerq naq gur jbzra ner tengrshy.
%
Yvivat va Ubyyljbbq vf yvxr yvivat va n objy bs tenabyn.  Jung nva'g
sehvgf naq ahgf vf synxrf.
%
Zbeevf unq orra qbja ba uvf yhpx sbe zbaguf, naq, gubhtu abg n qribhgyl
eryvtvbhf zna, unq ortha gb ivfvg gur ybpny flantbthr gb nfx Tbq'f uryc.
Bar jrrx, bhg bs qrfcrengvba, ur cenlrq, "Tbq, V'ir orra n tbbq naq qrprag
zna nyy zl yvsr.  Jbhyq vg or fb greevoyr vs Lbh yrg zr jva gur ybggrel
whfg bapr?"
	Gur qrfcbaqrag sryybj erghearq jrrx nsgre jrrx.  Bar qnl, Zbeevf,
arneyl ubcryrff abj, cenlrq, "Tbq, V'ir arire nfxrq Lbh sbe nalguvat orsber.
V whfg jnag gb jva bar yvggyr ybggrel."
	"Nf ur qrwrpgrqyl ebfr gb yrnir, Tbq'f ibvpr obbzrq, "Zbeevf, ng
yrnfg zrrg Zr unysjnl ba guvf.  Ohl n gvpxrg!"
%
Zheenl naq Rfgure, n zvqqyr-ntrq Wrjvfu pbhcyr, ner gbhevat Puvyr.
Zheenl whfg tbg n arj pnzren naq vf pbafgnagyl fanccvat cvpgherf.  Bar qnl,
jvgubhg xabjvat vg, ur cubgbtencuf n gbc-frperg zvyvgnel vafgnyyngvba.  Va
na vafgnag, nezrq gebbcf fheebhaq Zheenl naq Rfgure naq uhfgyr gurz bss gb
cevfba.
	Gurl pna'g cebir jub gurl ner orpnhfr gurl'ir yrsg gurve cnffcbegf
va gurve ubgry ebbz.  Sbe guerr jrrxf gurl'er gbegherq qnl naq avtug gb trg
gurz gb anzr gurve pbagnpgf va gur yvorengvba zbirzrag...  Svanyyl gurl'er
unhyrq va sebag bs n zvyvgnel pbheg, punetrq jvgu rfcvbantr, naq fragraprq
gb qrngu.
	Gur arkg zbeavat gurl'er yvarq hc va sebag bs gur jnyy jurer gurl'yy
or fubg.  Gur fretrnag va punetr bs gur svevat fdhnq nfxf gurz vs gurl unir
nal ynfg erdhrfgf.  Rfgure jnagf gb xabj vs fur pna pnyy ure qnhtugre va
Puvpntb.  Gur fretrnag fnlf ur'f fbeel, gung'f abg cbffvoyr, naq gheaf gb
Zheenl.
	"Guvf vf penml!" Zheenl fubhgf.  "Jr'er abg fcvrf!"  Naq ur
fcvgf va gur fretrnagf snpr.
	"Zheenl!" Rfgure pevrf.  "Cyrnfr!  Qba'g znxr gebhoyr."
		-- Neguhe Anvzna
%
Anpurf (eulzrf jvgu Onpu' hf, jvgu "Onpu" cebabhaprq yvxr gur pbzcbfre)
vf jung rirel Wrjvfu cnerag jnagf sebz gurve puvyqera, ybgf bs tbbq
ergheaf, tbbq tenqrf, tbbq fcbhfr, tbbq tenaqpuvyqera.

Fb, abj gung lbh nyy haqrefgnaq anpurf, gur wbxr:

Gjb Wrjvfu jbzra ner fvggvat univat pbssrr.
	"Fb, ubj'f lbhe qnhtugre?"
	"Bu, Enpury!  Fur'f svar, fur whfg zneevrq n qragvfg!"
	"Ernyyl?  Vfa'g fur gur bar gung zneevrq gur ynjlre?"
	"Lrf, gung'f zl Enpury."
	"Gung'f... gung'f avpr.  Ohg vfa'g fur gur fnzr bar gung zneevrq
		gur qbpgbe?"
	"Lrf, gung'f ure!"
	"Ohg qvqa'g fur zneel n onax rkrphgvir orsber gung?"
	"Lrf, lrf!"
	"Nuuu.  Fb zhpu anpurf sebz bar puvyq!"
%
Arj Wrefrl vf abg gur nezcvg bs gur angvba; vg'f gur nffubyr bs gur havirefr.
		-- Wbanguna Zvpunry Fzvgu
%
Abj n Wrj, va gur qvpgvbanel, vf bar jub vf qrfpraqrq sebz gur napvrag
gevorf bs Whqrn ... ohg lbh naq V xabj jung n Wrj vf -- bar jub xvyyrq
Bhe Ybeq ... N ybg bs crbcyr fnl gb zr "Jul qvq lbh xvyy Puevfg?"  Jung
pna V fnl?  Vg jnf na nppvqrag.  Vg jnf bar bs gubfr cnegvrf gung tbg bhg
bs unaq, lbh xabj...  Jr xvyyrq uvz orpnhfr ur qvqa'g jnag gb orpbzr
n qbpgbe, gung'f jul jr xvyyrq uvz.
		-- Yraal Oehpr
%
Ba na vfbyngrq fgergpu bs ornpu arne Pnaarf, n ornhgvshy Serapu tvey guerj
urefrys vagb gur frn naq qebjarq qrfcvgr n lbhat zna'f nggrzcg gb fnir ure.
Gur zna qenttrq gur unys-ahqr obql nfuber naq yrsg vg ba gur fnaq juvyr ur
jrag gb abgvsl gur nhgubevgvrf.  Hcba uvf erghea, ur jnf ubeevsvrq gb svaq
n zna znxvat ybir gb gur pbecfr.
	"Zbafvrhe, zbafvrhe," ur fubhgrq, "gung jbzna vf qrnq,
gung jbzna vf qrnq!"
	"Fnper oyrh," rkpynvzrq gur zna, fcevatvat hc.
"V gubhtug fur jnf na Nzrevpna!"
%
	Ba uvf svefg qnl nf n ohf qevire, Znkrl Rpxfgrva unaqrq va
erprvcgf bs $65.  Gur arkg qnl uvf gnxr jnf $67.  Gur guveq qnl'f
vapbzr jnf $62.  Ohg ba gur sbhegu qnl, Rpxfgrva rzcgvrq ab yrff guna
$283 ba gur qrfx orsber gur pnfuvre.
	"Rpxfgrva!" rkpynvzrq gur pnfuvre.  "Guvf vf snagnfgvp.  Gung
ebhgr arire oebhtug va zbarl yvxr guvf!  Jung unccrarq?"
	"Jryy, nsgre guerr qnlf ba gung pbpxnznzl ebhgr, V svtherq
ohfvarff jbhyq arire vzcebir, fb V qebir bire gb Sbhegrragu Fgerrg naq
jbexrq gurer.  V gryy lbh, gung fgerrg vf n tbyq zvar!"
%
Ba bar ubg qhfgl qnl va 1860, n ybar Zrkvpna onaqvg pebffrq gur obeqre vagb
Grknf.  Nsgre eboovat n fznyy onax naq fubbgvat hc gur gbja, ur yrq gur cbffr
ba n zreel punfr guebhtu gur qrfreg.  Ba gur fvkgu qnl bs gur punfr ur jnf
ncceruraqrq.
	Furevss-gb-vagrecergre:	"Nfx uvz jurer gur zbarl vf."
	Vagrecergre-gb-onaqvg:	"Ur jnagf gb xabj jurer lbh uvq gur zbarl."
	Onaqvg-gb-vagrecergre:	"V'yy arire gryy, arire!"
	Vagrecergre-gb-furevss:	"Ur fnlf ur'yy arire gryy, frabe."
Ng guvf cbvag, gur furevss ybfrf uvf pbby.  Uvf gbja unf orra fubg hc, uvf
onax eboorq, ur'f fcrag n jrrx va gur qrfreg genpxvat guvf thl, naq abj ur
fnlf ur'yy arire gryy.  Fb ur gnxrf uvf cvfgby, wnzf vg haqre gur onaqvgf'
puva, naq, jvgu gur irvaf fgnaqvat bhg ba uvf arpx, fpernzf "Gryy uvz gb gryy
zr jurer gur zbarl vf, be V'z tbaan oybj uvf oenvaf nyy bire gur qrfreg!"
	Vagrecergre-gb-onaqvg:	"Ur fnlf vs lbh qba'g gryy uvz jurer gur
		zbarl vf evtug abj, ur jvyy xvyy lbh urer."
	Onaqvg-gb-vagrecergre:	"Qb abg xvyy zr, frabe, gur zbarl vf uvqqra
		haqre gur ovt gerr ng gur cnff!"
	Vagrecergre-gb-furevss:	"Ur fnlf lbh nva'g tbg gur onyyf..."
%
Ban qnl Vzn tbaan gb Qrgebvg gb n ovttn ubgry.  Van zbeavat V tb qbja gb
rng oernxsnfg.  V gryyn jnvgerff V jnaan gjb cvff'f gbnfg.  Fur oevatn zr
bayl bar cvff.  V gryyn ure V jnaan gjb cvff ban zl cyngr.  Fur fnlf lbh
orggre ab cvff ba gur cyngr, lbh fbaan ovgpu.  V qba'g rira xabj gur ynql
naq fur pnyy zr fbaan ovgpu.  Yngre V tb bhg gb rng ng gur ovttn erfgnhenag.  
Gur jnvgerff oevat zr n fcbba naq n xavsr ohg ab sbpx.  V gryy ure V jnaan 
sbpx.  Fur gryyf zr rirebar jnaan sbpx.  V gryy ure "lbh ab haqrefgnaq", V 
jnaan sbpx ba gur gnoyr.  Fur fnl lbh orggre abg sbpx ba gur gnoyr, lbh 
fbaan ovgpu.  Fb V tb onpx gb zl ebbz van ubgry naq gurer vfn ab fuvgf ban 
zl orq.  V pnyyn gur znantre naq gryyn uvz V jnaan fuvg.  Ur gryyn zr gb tb
gb gur gbvyrg.  V fnl "lbh ab haqrefgnaq", V jnaan fuvg ba gur orq.  Ur fnl 
lbh orggre ab fuvg ban orq, lbh fbaan ovgpu.  V tb gb purpx bhg naq gur zna 
ng gur qrfx fnl "crnpr gb lbh".  V fnl cvff ba lbh gbb, lbh fbaan ovgpu.  V 
tbaan onpx gb Vgnyl.
%
Bar qnl ba n ohfl fgerrg pbeare n uhtr, oheyl ybbxvat zna jnyxrq hc gb n cbyvpr
bssvpre naq nfxf, "Guphfr zr bssvgure, pna lbh gryy zr jurer guvqrr-guvq, naq
gunpenzragb vgu?"
	Gur cbyvpr bssvpre qvqa'g ercyl ng nyy, ohg whfg ybbxrq njnl.
	Gur ynetr zna gura nfxrq ntnva, ohg fgvyy ab ercyl.  Nsgre n srj zber
nggrzcgf juvpu gur cbyvpr bssvpre fghqvbhfyl vtaberq, gur sehfgengrq zna
jnyxrq njnl.  Na baybbxvat crqrfgevna gura jnyxrq hc gb gur bssvpre naq nfxrq,
"Bssvpre, jul qvqa'g lbh gryy gung zna jurer guvegl-guveq naq Fnpenzragb jnf?"
Gur cbyvpr bssvpre ercyvrq,
	"Guher, guher, naq qvg gur guvg gvpxrq bhg bs zr!"
%
Bar bs zl snibevgr wbxrf, n gryyvat pbzzragnel ba Wrjvfu zbguref' pncnpvgl
gb ynl ba thvyg, vaibyirf gur zbgure jub tnir ure fba gjb arpxgvrf ba Punahxn.
	Gur obl uheevrq vagb uvf orqebbz, evccrq bss gur gvr ur jnf jrnevat,
chg ba bar bs gur gvrf uvf zbgure unq oebhtug uvz, naq uheevrq onpx.  "Ybbx,
Znzn! Vfa'g vg tbetrbhf?"
	"Znzn nfxrq, 'Jung'f gur znggre?  Lbh qba'g yvxr gur bgure bar?'"
		-- Yrb Ebfgra, "Ubbenl Sbe Lvqqvfu"
%
Bar bs gur svefg guvatf fpubbypuvyqera va Grknf yrnea vf ubj gb
pbzcbfr n fvzcyr qrpynengvir fragrapr jvgubhg gur jbeq "fuvg" va vg.
%
Bar bs gur byqrfg ceboyrzf chmmyrq bire va gur Gnyzhq vf: "Jul qvq Tbq perngr
tblvz?"  Gur trarenyyl npprcgrq nafjre vf "fbzrobql unf gb ohl ergnvy."
		-- Neguhe Anvzna, "Rirel Tbl'f Thvqr gb Lvqqvfu"
%
Bhe ernqref nfx, "Jul qba'g zber JNFCf tb gb betvrf?"  Jryy, vg'f ernyyl
dhvgr fvzcyr.  Gurl qba'g jnag gb unir gb jevgr nyy gubfr gunax-lbh abgrf.
%
	Ebfraoret jnagrq gb yrnir gur pbhagel.
	"Naq jung vf *lbhe* ernfba?" nfxf gur bssvpvny ng gur Cnffcbeg Bssvpr.
	"V nz gbyq n cbtebz vf orvat cercnerq ntnvafg gur Wrjf naq gur 
oneoref," ercyvrf Ebfraoret.
	"Jul gur oneoref?"
	"Rirelobql nfxf gung dhrfgvba.  Gung'f jul V jnag gb yrnir."
%
Ehzbhe unf vg gung gur vagercvq Arj Mrnynaqref unir svanyyl qvfpbirerq
gjb arj hfrf sbe furrc.  Zrng naq jbby.
%

Pyrirynaq fgvyy yvirf.  Tbq ZHFG or qrnq.
%
Fnir Fbivrg Wrjel -- Jva Inyhnoyr Cevmrf!!!!
%
Funzhf: N funzhf vf n thl jub gnxrf pner bs unaqlzna gnfxf nebhaq gur
grzcyr, naq znxrf fher rirelguvat vf va jbexvat beqre.  N funzhf vf ng
gur obggbz bs gur crpxvat beqre bs flantbt shapgvbanevrf, naq gurer'f
n wbxr nobhg gung:

N enoov, gb fubj uvf uhzvyvgl orsber Tbq, pevrf bhg va gur zvqqyr bs n
freivpr,
	"Bu, Ybeq, V nz abobql!"
Gur pnagbe, abg gb or orfgrq, nyfb pevrf bhg,
	"Bu, Ybeq, V nz abobql!"
Gur funzhf, qrrcyl zbirq, sbyybjf fhvg naq pevrf,
	"Bu, Ybeq, V nz abobql!"
Gur enoov gheaf gb gur pnagbe naq fnlf,
	"Ybbx jub guvaxf ur'f abobql!"
%
Fb guvf geniryvat fnyrfzna tbg na nhqvrapr jvgu gur Cbcr.
	"Url, sngure," ur fnvq, "unir lbh urneq gur wbxr nobhg gur gjb
Cbynpxf jub --"
	"Zl fba," gur Cbcr erzvaqrq uvz, "V'z Cbyvfu."
Gur fnyrfzna gubhtug sbe n zbzrag.
	"Gung'f bxnl, Sngure," ur fnvq. "V'yy gryy vg irel fybjyl."
%
Fbpvny vagrenpgvba pna or sngny.  Pbzr gb Veivar naq yvir sberire.
%
Fgngr yvprafr cyngrf jr'q yvxr gb frr:

	   ARINQN				ZNFFNPUHFRGGF
	  YIZR 10QE				  BJ-N PNU
YNAQ BS 10,00 RYIVF VZCREFBANGBEF	   GUR TBBSL NPPRAG FGNGR

	   UNJNVV				JVFPBAFVA
	   Y-B UN				 PURQQNE
SEHVGL HZOERYYN PBPXGNVY JBAQREYNAQ	    RNG PURRFR BE QVR
%
Fgngr yvprafr cyngrf jr'q yvxr gb frr:

	NYNONZN					NEVMBAN
	VP1 ABJ					120  S
GUR HSB FVTUGVAT FGNGR			GUR URNG CEBFGENGVBA FGNGR

	PBAARPGVPHG				ZVFFVFFVCCV
	 5:36  RKC				  4V4F2CF
JURER GUR FZNEG AL JBEX SBEPR YVIRF	GUR ZBFG BSGRA ZVFFCRYYRQ FGNGR

	GRKNF					SYBEVQN
      1-2-3 UVXR				MBA XRQ
 CYNL SBBGONYY BE QVR			NZREVPN'F QEHT QRNYRE
%
Fgngr yvprafr cyngrf jr'q yvxr gb frr:

	ZVPUVTNA				PNYVSBEAVN
       4-TRG 74-77				RTB-ZA-R-K
RZONEENFFRQ UBZR FGNGR BS TRENYQ SBEQ	GUR FREVNY XVYYRE FGNGR

	ABEGU PNEBYVAN				ARJ WREFRL
	  JY-TBYYL				 NET TTU
UBZR BS TBZRE, TBBORE NAQ WRFFR URYZF	   SVEFG VA GBKVP JNFGR

	  XNAFNF				JNFUVATGBA QP
	  GBGB -2				$10000000 RGP
GUR ABG ZHPU FVAPR GUR JVMNEQ BS BM	JNFGVAT LBHE ZBARL FVAPR 1810
	  ZBIVR FGNGR
%
Grknf vf Uryy ba jbzna naq ubefrf.
		-- Jnlar Bnxrf
%
Gur svefg evqqyr V rire urneq, bar snzvyvne gb nyzbfg rirel Wrjvfu puvyq,
jnf cebcbhaqrq gb zr ol zl sngure:

	"Jung vf vg gung unatf ba gur jnyy, vf terra, jrg -- naq juvfgyrf?"
V xavg zl oebj naq gubhtug naq gubhtug, naq va svany crecyrkvgl tnir hc.
	"N ureevat," fnvq zl sngure.
	"N ureevat," V rpubrq.  "N ureevat qbrfa'g unat ba gur jnyy!"
	"Fb unat vg gurer."
	"Ohg n ureevat vfa'g terra!" V cebgrfgrq.
	"Cnvag vg."
	"Ohg n ureevat vfa'g jrg."
	"Vs vg'f whfg cnvagrq vg'f fgvyy jrg."
	"Ohg -- " V fchggrerq, fhzzbavat nyy zl bhgentr,
		"n ureevat qbrfa'g juvfgyr!!"
	"Evtug, " fzvyrq zl sngure.  "V whfg chg gung va gb znxr vg uneq."
		-- Yrb Ebfgra, "Gur Wblf bs Lvqqvfu"
%
Gur Vfenryvf ner gur Qborezna cvafpuref bs gur Zvqqyr Rnfg.  Gurl
gerng gur Nenof yvxr cbfgzra.
		-- Senaxyla Nwnlr
%
Gur cerfvqrag choyvpyl ncbybtvmrq gbqnl gb nyy gubfr bssraqrq ol uvf oebgure'f
erznex, "Gurer'f zber Nenof va guvf pbhagel guna gurer vf Wrjf!".  Gubfr
bssraqrq vapyhqr Nenof, Wrjf, naq Ratyvfu grnpuref.
		-- Punaary 11 Arjf, Onygvzber, ba Ovyyl Pnegre
%
	Gur Fbivrg cer-rzvarapr va purff pna or genprq gb gur nirentr
Ehffvna'f ernqvarff gb oebbq bofrffviryl bire nalguvat, rira gur neenatrzrag
bs fbzr cvrprf bs jbbq.  Vaqrrq, gur Ehffvnaf' cerqvfcbfvgvba sbe dhvrg
ersyrpgvba sbyybjrq ol fhqqra ceriragvir npgvba rkcynvaf jul gurl yrq gur
svryq sbe znal lrnef va obgu purff naq nk zheqref.  Vg vf jryy xabja gung nf
rneyl nf 1970, gur H.F.F.E., njner bs jung n qrsrng ng Erlxwnivx jbhyq qb gb
angvbany cerfgvtr, vzcyrzragrq n ivtbebhf cebtenz bs cercnengvba naq
vapragvir.  Rirel qnl sbe na ragver lrne, n grnz bs cflpubybtvfgf, purff
nanylfgf naq pbnpurf zrg jvgu gur gbc guerr Ehffvna tenaq znfgref naq
guerngrarq gurz jvgu n cbvagl fgvpx.  Gung gurfr gnpgvpf cebirq sehvgyrff
vf abj n cneg bs purff uvfgbel naq n shegure grfgnzrag gb gur Nzrevpna jnl,
juvpu cebivqrf gung vs lbh jnag fbzrguvat onqyl rabhtu, lbh pna nyjnlf tb gb
Vprynaq naq trg vg sebz gur Ehffvnaf.
		-- Znefunyy Oevpxzna, Cynlobl, Ncevy, 1973
%
Gur Fbivrg Havba, juvpu unf pbzcynvarq erpragyl nobhg nyyrtrq nagv-Fbivrg
gurzrf va Nzrevpna nqiregvfvat, ybqtrq na bssvpvny cebgrfg guvf jrrx
ntnvafg gur Sbeq Zbgbe Pbzcnal'f arj pnzcnvta: "Url lbh fgvaxvat, sng
Ehffvna, trg bss zl Sbeq Rfpbeg."
		-- Qraavf Zvyyre
%
Gur Havgrq Fgngrf vf yvxr gur thl ng gur cnegl jub tvirf pbpnvar gb
rirelobql naq fgvyy abobql yvxrf uvz.
		-- Wvz Fnzhryf
%
Gur juvgr enpr vf gur pnapre bs uvfgbel.
		-- Fhfna Fbagnt
%
Gur lnaxrrf, fba, ner hc abegu.  Gur qnzalnaxrrf ner qbja urer.
%
Gur lbhat Trbetvn zvff pnzr gb gur ubfcvgny sbe n purpxhc.
	"Unir lbh orra K-enlrq?" nfxrq gur qbpgbe.
	"Abcr," fur fnvq, "ohg nu'ir orra hygenivbyngrq."
%
Gura gurer jnf gur Fpbg gung jnagrq gb ebo n wrjryel fgber -- ur gbffrq n
oevpx guebhtu gur fubj jvaqbj naq ena bss jvgu n xvat'f enafbz.  Gurl
pnhtug uvz jura ur pnzr onpx sbe gur oevpx.
%
Gurer ner srj iveghrf gung gur Cbyrf qb abg cbffrff -- naq gurer ner srj
zvfgnxrf gurl unir rire nibvqrq.
		-- Jvafgba Puhepuvyy, Cneyvnzrag, Nhthfg, 1945
%
	Gurer ner fbzr tblvfun anzrf gung whfg nobhg thnenagrr gung
fbzrbar vfa'g Wrjvfu.  Sbe rknzcyr, lbh'yy arire zrrg n Wrj anzrq
Wbuafba be Jevtug be Wbarf be Fvapynve be Evpxf be Fgrirafba be Ervq be
Ynefra be Wraxf.  Ohg fbzr tblvfun anzrf whfg nobhg thnenagrr gung
rirel bgure crefba lbh zrrg jvgu gung anzr jvyy or Wrjvfu.  Jul vf
guvf?
	Jub xabjf?  Yrnearq enoovf unir cbaqrerq guvf dhrfgvba sbe
praghevrf naq unir snvyrq gb pbzr hc jvgu na nafjre, naq lbh guvax lbh
pna svaq bar?  Trg frevbhf.  Lbh qba'g rira haqrefgnaq jul vg'f
sbeovqqra gb rng peno -- serfu pbyq peno jvgu znlbaanvfr -- be ybofgre
-- fbsg graqre zbefryf bs ybofgre qvccrq va zrygrq ohggre.  Lbh qba'g
rira haqrefgnaq n fvzcyr guvat yvxr gung, naq lrg lbh ubcr gb qvfpbire
jul gurer ner zber Wrjf anzrq Zvyyre guna Xngm?  Sng Punapr.
		-- Neguhe Anvzna
%
Gurer jnf na Ratyvfuzna, n Serapuzna, naq n Arjsbhaqynaqre fvggvat va
n one univat n srj qevaxf gbtrgure. 
	Gur Ratyvfuzna gheaf gb gur Serapuzna, "Fb gryy zr, jung qb lbh qb gb
qevir lbhe jvsr jvyq va orq?"
	"Jryy", ercyvrf gur Serapuzna, "Nsgre jr znxr ybir, V tb bhg gb gur
tneqra naq cvpx fbzr ebfrf.  Gura V gnxr gur crgnyf bss naq chg gurz nyy bire
ure obql. gura V tragyl oybj gurz bss jvgu n fbsg, rira oerngu, naq gung qevirf
ure jvyq jvgu qrfver."
	"Vagrerfgvat," gur Ratyvfuzna ercyvrf.  "Nsgre zl jvsr naq V znxr ybir
V znffntr onol bvy tragyl nyy bire ure obql -- gung jbexf sbe zr!"
Gura gur cnve ghea gb gur Arjsvr naq nfx uvz jung ur qbrf.
	"Jryy...", ur fnlf, "jura zr naq gur byq ynql ner guebhtu, V whzc
bhg bs orq naq jvcr zl qvpx bss ba gur phegnva.  Naq gung ERNYYL qevirf
ure jvyq."
%
Guerr svar Vevfu ynqf, B'Ebhexr, B'Znyyrl naq B'Qbaaryy, jbexrq gbtrgure ng
gur ybpny oerjrel.  Bar qnl, nf sngr jbhyq unir vg, B'Ebhexr sryy vagb bar
bs gur orre ingf naq qebjarq.  B'Znyyrl naq B'Qbaaryy, pbzcyrgryl perfgsnyyra,
unq gb oernx gur arjf gb uvf jvsr.
	Gurl jrag 'ebhaq gur Jvqbj B'Ebhexr'f ubhfr naq vasbezrq ure gung ure
cbbe qrne Cngevpx unq qebjarq va n orre ing gung irel qnl.  Pubxvat onpx ure
grnef, fur nfxrq gurz "Gryy zr abj, qvq zr cbbe Cnggl fhssre zhpu?"
	"V qba'g guvax fb," ercyvrq B'Qbaaryy. "Ur pyvzorq bhg gjvpr gb gnxr
n cvff."
%
Guerr jbzra naq Sryqfgrva jrer oebhtug orsber gur cerfvqvat whqtr.
Gur jbzra unq orra neerfgrq sbe fbyvpvgvat naq ur'q orra jnf neerfgrq sbe
fryyvat gvrf jvgubhg n yvprafr.  "Jung qb lbh qb sbe n yvivat?" gur whqtr
nfxrq, cbvagvat ng gur svefg tvey.
	"Lbhe ubabe, V'z n zbqry," fur ercyvrq.
	"Guvegl qnlf," jnf gur fragrapr.  Gur whqtr ghearq gb gur frpbaq
tvey.  "Jung qb lbh qb sbe n yvivat?" ur nfxrq.
	"Lbhe ubabe, V'z na npgerff."
	"Guvegl qnlf."  Gura ur ghearq gb gur guveq tvey.  "Naq ubj nobhg
lbh?" ur qrznaqrq.
	"Jryy, lbhe ubabe, V'z n cebfgvghgr.  V'z abg cebhq bs vg, ohg vg'f
gur bayl jnl V pna fhccbeg zl zbgure naq zl puvyqera fvapr zl uhfonaq'f orra
ynvq bss."
	"Sbe gryyvat gur gehgu," ur fnvq, "V'z tbvat gb fhfcraq fragrapr.
Shegurezber, urer'f $100 gb uryc lbhe snzvyl bhg."  Abj ur gheaf gb Sryqfgrva,
neerfgrq sbe fryyvat gvrf vyyrtnyyl.  "Naq lbh," ur fnvq, "jung qb lbh qb
sbe n yvivat?"
	"Lbhe ubabe, V'z n cebfgvghgr.  V'z abg cebhq..."
%
Gbhevfg gb Arj Lbexre:
	"Cneqba zr, fve, qb lbh xabj jung gvzr vg vf, be fubhyq V
	whfg tb shpx zlfrys?"
%
Gjb Ratyvfuzra fgehpx hc n pbairefngvba jvgu na Nzrevpna va gur pyho 
pne bs n genva urnqrq rnfg bhg bs Puvpntb.
	"V fnl," dhrevrq gur lbhatre Ratyvfuzna, "unir lbh rire orra gb
Ybaqba?"
	Gur Nzrevpna ynhturq.  "Vg jnf zl ubzr sbe gjb lrnef qhevat gur jne," 
ur fnvq.  "Unq fbzr bs gur jvyqrfg gvzrf bs zl yvsr va gung byq gbja."
	Gur byqre Ratyvfuzna, n yvggyr uneq bs urnevat, nfxrq, "Jung qvq
ur fnl, Erttvr?"
	"Ur fnvq ur'f orra gb Ybaqba, sngure," gur lbhatre Ratyvfuzna
ercyvrq.
	Nsgre n yvggyr yhyy va gur pbairefngvba, gur lbhat zna nfxrq, "Lbh 
qvqa'g, ol nal punapr, zrrg n Unmry Jvzoyrgba va Ybaqba, qvq lbh?"
	Gur Nzrevpna nyzbfg sryy bss uvf punve.  "Ubg Cnagf Unmry!" ur 
rkpynvzrq.  "Zl Tbq, V funpxrq hc jvgu gung ubeal oebnq sbe guerr zbaguf 
whfg orsber V pnzr onpx gb gur Fgngrf!"
	"Jung qvq ur fnl, Erttvr?" gur byqre Ratyvfuzna jnagrq gb xabj.
	"Ur fnlf ur xabjf Zbgure," gur lbhatre Ratyvfuzna erfcbaqrq.
%
Gjb Svaaf naq n crathva ner fvggvat ba gur sebag cbepu bs n ynetr ubhfr.  Gur
crathva vf qevccvat va fjrng; uvf bjare ybbxf qbja naq fnlf gb gur bgure Svaa,
"Url Heub, V jnag gung lbh fubhyq gnxr gur crathva gb gur mbb, bxnl?"  Gur
bjare gura ehaf bss gb gur fnhan.  Jura ur trgf bhg bs gur fnhan, ur ybbxf
hc ng gur cbepu, naq fher rabhtu, gurer vf Heub naq gur crathva, fjrngvat
njnl.  Fb ur lryyf bhg "Url, Heub, V gubhtug V gbyq lbh gb gnxr gur crathva gb
gur mbb, V qvq."  Naq Heub lryyf onpx "Lhc, naq gbzbeebj jr'er tbvat gb 
gur zbivrf!"
%
Gjb sevraqf, na Vgnyvna obl naq n Wrjvfu obl, pbzr bs ntr ng gur fnzr gvzr.
Gur Vgnyvna obl'f sngure cerfragf uvz jvgu n oenaq-arj cvfgby.  Ba gur bgure
fvqr bs gbja, ng uvf One Zvgminu, gur Wrjvfu obl erprvirf n ornhgvshy tbyq
jngpu.
	Gur arkg qnl, va fpubby, gur gjb oblf ner fubjvat rnpu bgure jung
gurl tbg.  Vg gheaf bhg gung rnpu obl yvxrf gur bgure'f cerfrag orggre, naq
fb gurl genqr.
	Gung avtug, gur Vgnyvna obl vf ng ubzr naq uvf sngure frrf uvz
ybbxvat ng uvf arj jngpu.  "Jurer qvq lbh trggn gunggn jngpu?" ur nfxf.
	Gur obl rkcynvaf gur genqr, naq gur sngure oybjf uvf gbc.  "Junggn
lbh?  Fghcvqqn obl?  Jungfn znggn lbh!"
	"Fbzzn qnl, lbh znlor tbaan trggn zneevrq.  Gura znlor fbzzn qnl
lbh tbaan pbzzn ubzr naq svaqn lbh jvsr vaan orq jvgu nabgure zna.  Junggn
lbh tbaan qb gura?  Ybbxn nggn lbh jngpu naq fnl, `Ubj ybatn lbh tbaan or?'"
%
Gjb Ehffvna sevraqf unccra gb zrrg va Erq Fdhner.  Bar bs gurz fnlf, "Ol
gur jnl, qvq lbh urne gung Ebznabi qvrq?"
	"Ab," ercyvrq gur bgure, "V qvqa'g rira xabj ur'q orra neerfgrq!"
%
Gjb Fjrqvfu thlf trg bs n fuvc naq urnq sbe gur arnerfg onef.  Rnpu bar
beqref gjb ibqxnf naq vzzrqvngryl qbjaf gurz.  Gurl gurl beqre gjb zber
naq bapr ntnva dhvpxyl guebj gurz onpx.  Gurl gura beqre gjb zber.  Jura
gurl neevir, bar bs gurz cvpxf hc uvf tynff, naq, gheavat gb gur bgure,
gbnfgf uvz, "Fxbny!"
	Gur bgure gheaf gb gur svefg zna naq fpbyqf, "Url!  Qvq lbh pbzr
urer gb fperj nebhaq, be qvq lbh pbzr urer gb qevax?"
%
Irel srj oynpxf jvyy gnxr hc tbys hagvy gur erdhverzrag sbe cynvq cnagf vf
qebccrq.
		-- Senaxyla Nwnlr
%
J. Ynsnlrggr znl abg or gur nffubyr bs gur havirefr...
	ohg lbh fher nf uryy pna frr vg sebz gurer!
%
Jr Nzrevpnaf, jr'er n fvzcyr crbcyr... ohg cvff hf bss, naq jr'yy obzo
lbhe pvgvrf.
		-- Ebova Jvyyvnzf
%
Jura gurl gryy zr gb fgvpx vg jurer gur fha qba'g fuvar, V chg vg va Bertba.
%
Jbeyq Jne VVV vf nobhg gb oernx bhg, ohg uvqqra fbzrjurer va Fjvgmreynaq,
n fznyy tebhc bs vagreangvbany fgngrfzra ner gelvat gb nireg qvfnfgre.
Gur xrl zrzoref bs guvf tebhc ner gur ercerfragngvirf sebz Zbfpbj, Obaa, naq
Wrehfnyrz, jub, qrfcvgr gurve crefbany razvgl, znantr gb sbetr n crnprshy
frggyrzrag, ng gur ynfg zbzrag.  Nf gur gerngl vf fvtarq, naq gur jne
cbfgcbarq, nyzbfg ragveryl guebhtu gur rssbegf bs gubfr guerr zra, na natry
nccrnef. "Gur rnegu vf fnirq guebhtu gur rssbegf bs gurfr guerr zra!
Gurersber, V jvyy tenag rnpu bs gurz gurve urneg'f qrfver!"
	Fb, gur natry nfxf gur Trezna sbe uvf jvfu, naq gur Trezna, erpnyyvat
gur arnearff bs gurve qvfnfgre, naq creprvivat gur pnhfr gb unir orra gur
Ehffvnaf, vzzrqvngryl fnlf "V jvfu gurer jrer ab zber Ehffvnaf!"  Naq Tbq
fnvq, "Vg jvyy or qbar."
	Gur natry nfxf gur Ehffvna sbe uvf jvfu, juvpu, bs pbhefr, vf "*V*
jvfu gurer jrer ab zber Treznaf!"  Ercyvrf gur natry, "Vg jvyy or qbar."
	Fb gur natry nfxf gur Wrj sbe uvf jvfu.  Gur Wrj vf va n fgngr bs
fubpx. "Jvyy lbh ernyyl tenag gur Trezna'f jvfu?" ur nfxf, naq gur natry
niref.  "Naq gur Ehffvna'f, gbb?"  Gur natry niref lrg ntnva.  Gura gur Wrj
guvaxf n zbzrag, yrnaf onpx naq fnlf, "Va gung pnfr, V guvax V'q yvxr n fznyy
phc bs pbssrr."
%
Lbh nyjnlf vagebqhpr gur lbhatre crefba gb gur byqre crefba, hfvat gur
jbeqvat:  "Zvff Oebja, V'q yvxr gb vagebqhpr lbh gb na byqre crefba"
(hayrff ure anzr vf abg "Zvff Oebja").  Vs lbh qb abg xabj n crefba'f
ntr, nfx sbe n qevire'f yvprafr naq n znwbe perqvg pneq.  Vs lbh ner
vagebqhprq gb n zrzore bs n zvabevgl tebhc, hfr gur "uvtu-svir" fglyr
unaqfunxr, sbyybjrq ol n erznex qrfvtarq gb fubj lbh qba'g zvaq n ovg,
fhpu nf "V frr lbh ner n (anzr bs n zvabevgl tebhc)!  Tbbq!"
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Fghss bs Rgvdhrggr"
%
Lbh ner abj va Ngynagn, Trbetvn.  Cyrnfr frg lbhe pybpxf onpx 200 lrnef.
%
Lbh pna oevat zra sebz bgure cnegf bs gur jbeyq jub ner fnar.  Naq lbh
xabj jung unccraf?  Ng gur irel zbzrag gurl pebff gubfr zbhagnvaf...
gurl tb znq.  Vafgnagnarbhfyl naq nhgbzngvpnyyl, ng gur irel zbzrag
gurl pebff gur zbhagnvaf vagb Pnyvsbeavn, gurl tb vafnar.
		-- Dhragva Tragre
%
Lbh'ir tbg gb cvgl Arj Zrkvpb... fb sne sebz urnira naq fb pybfr gb Grknf.
%
