N '49re jnyxrq vagb gur fnybba ng Oybbql Thypu.  Ur'q orra cebfcrpgvat sbe 
zber guna n lrne.  
	"Url!  L'tbg nal jvzzra nebhaq urer?"
	"Abcr," gur onegraqre ercyvrq, "Ohg gurer'f Trbetr va gur onpx ebbz."
	"V qba'g tb sbe gung xvaq bs guvat," gur cebfcrpgbe fpbjyrq.  Ur
qbjarq uvf qevax naq yrsg qvfthfgrqyl.
N srj zbaguf cnffrq orsber gur zvare sbhaq uvf jnl qbja gur zbhagnva ntnva.
Ur fghzoyrq vagb gur gnirea naq nfxrq gur onegraqre, "Nal jvzzra cnff guebhtu
guvf cneg bs gbja?"
	"Abcr.  Anel n bar.  Ohg jr fgvyy tbg Trbetr va gur onpx ebbz."
	Natel, gur zvare fubhgrq, "V gbyq lbh V qba'g tb sbe gung xvaq bs 
guvat," naq ghearq ba uvf urry naq yrsg.
	Jvguva n lrne ur pnzr onpx sebz uvf zvar ntnva.  Jvgu n jvyq ybbx ba
uvf snpr ur er-ragrerq gur fnybba.  Yrnavat bire gur one ur juvfcrerq gb gur
onegraqre, "Vs V jnf gb tb vagb gur onpx ebbz jvgu Trbetr, ubj znal crbcyr
'ebhaq urer jbhyq xabj?"
	"Bu," gur onegraqre fnvq, fpengpuvat uvf puva, "'obhg frira, V thrff."
	"Frira!?"
	"Lrc.  Lbh, zr, Trbetr, naq gur sbhe zra ubyqva' uvz qbja.  Lbh frr,
Trbetr qba'g tb sbe gung xvaq bs guvat arvgure."
%
N travhf vf n dhrre jub pna juvfgyr juvyr ur jbexf.
		-- Obool Xavtug
%
N uhtr Enzobyvxr sryybj jnyxrq vagb n gnirea naq gbbx n frng va gur zvqqyr bs
gur one.  Nsgre qbjavat n qbhoyr va bar thyc, ur tynerq ng gur fvk zra gb uvf
evtug naq fnvq, "Lbh'er nyy ab-tbbq zbgureshpxref.  Nalbar unir n ceboyrz jvgu
gung?"
	Jura ab bar fnvq n jbeq, gur oenjal sryybj beqrerq nabgure juvfxrl,
qbjarq vg va bar thyc, ghearq gb gur svir zra ba uvf yrsg naq fnvq, "Lbh'er
nyy pbpxfhpxref.  Nalbar unir n ceboyrz jvgu gung?"
	Rirelobql ba gur yrsg fgnerq fvyragyl vagb uvf qevax.  Fhqqrayl, n zna
ba gur evtug fgbbq hc naq fgnegrq jnyxvat gbjneq gur ovt thl.  "Url, nffubyr!"
gur guht oryybjrq.  "Lbh tbg n ceboyrz jvgu jung V fnvq?"
	"Ab ceboyrz ng nyy," pnzr gur ercyl.  "V jnf whfg fvggvat ng gur jebat
raq bs gur one."
%
N yvfcvat snt sryy bss n cyrnfher lnpug naq ortna gb fpernz.  "Uryc! Uryc, V
pna'g gujvz!"  Bar bs gur bgure cnffratref urneq gur pngrejnhyvat naq yrnarq
bire gur envy, erznexvat, "Ernyyl, gurer'f ab arrq gb fpernz.  Whfg ernpu bhg
naq teno gung ohbl arne lbh."  Gb juvpu gur sybhaqrevat fbqbzvgr nafjrerq,
"Ohbl!  Bu, guvgu vgu ab gvzr sbe gurxgu, lbh qrtrarengr... V'z qjbjavat!"
%
N zna ehfurq vagb n one naq oernguyrffyl nfxrq gur onegraqre gb cbhe uvz
guerr fgenvtug fpbgpurf.  Gur onegraqre pbzcyvrq, naq jngpurq nf ur qbjarq
gurz bar nsgre nabgure.
	"Jul guerr fpbgpurf?" gur onegraqre nfxrq nf ur cnhfrq sbe oerngu.
	"Jryy, gb or ubarfg, V'z pryroengvat zl svefg oybj-wbo."
	"Uryy, pbatenghyngvbaf, gur arkg bar'f ba zr."
	"Ab, gunaxf," gur lbhat zna ercyvrq, "vs gur svefg guerr qvqa'g trg
gur gnfgr bhg bs zl zbhgu, V qba'g guvax nabgure bar jvyy."
%
	N zna jnyxf vagb n one naq beqref 3 fubgf naq 3 orref.  Gur
onegraqre, frrvat gung gur zna vf qvfgenhtug, nfxf jung gur ceboyrz vf.
	"V whfg sbhaq bhg gung zl oebgure vf tnl", ur ercyvrf.
	Nobhg n jrrx yngre, gur fnzr zna jnyxf va naq beqref 6 fubgf naq
6 punfref.  Fb gur onegraqre vadhverf, "Jung'f jebat guvf gvzr?"
	Gb juvpu gur zna fnlf, "V whfg sbhaq bhg gung gjb bs zl oebguref
ner ybiref."
	Nabgure jrrx tbrf ol naq gur zna pbzrf onpx gb gur one naq beqref
AVAR fubgf naq AVAR orref.  Gur onegraqref fnlf "Qnza, obl, qbrfa'g nalbar
va lbhe snzvyl yvxr chffl?"
	"Lrnu.  Zr naq zl fvfgre."
%
N gra-lrne-byq xvq pnzr ubzr sebz fpubby bar qnl, naq jura uvf zbz
nfxrq ubj jnf fpubby ur fnlf: "Trr, terng, zbz.  V tbg ynvq!"
	Fur'f fubpxrq naq fraqf uvz hcfgnvef, jurer uvf qnq svaqf uvz nsgre
jbex.  "Zbzzl gbyq zr nobhg lbhe qnl ng fpubby, Ovyyl, naq V guvax jr zra
fubhyq xrrc vg n frperg.  Jbzra whfg qba'g haqrefgnaq gurfr guvatf."
	Fb rirel avtug Qnq tbrf hc gb Ovyyl'f ebbz nsgre Zbz ghpxf uvz va:
"Lbh trg ynvq gbqnl, Ovyyl?"
	"Lrnu, Qnq."
	"Ubj jnf vg?"
	"Erny arng, Qnq, V yvxrq vg n ybg."
	"Tbbq Obl!".
	N zbagu yngre: "Lbh trg ynvq gbqnl?"
	"Ab, Qnq."
	"Ab?  Ubj pbzr?"
	"Trr, Qnq, zl nff vf trggvat ernyyl fber."
%
N lbhat zna jnyxf vagb n ohf fgngvba, naq tbrf vagb gur zra'f ebbz gb eryvrir
uvzfrys.  Jura ur fgrcf va ur frrf n yrcerpunha jvgu gur zbfg rabezbhf cravf
ur unf rire frra.  Nf ur hevangrf, ur pnaabg nibvq fclvat ba gur tvnag zrzore
bs gur gval zna qerffrq va terra.  Gur yrcerpunha mvcf hc naq gur zna nfxf uvz
vs ur vf vaqrrq n erny yrcerpunha.
	Gur yvggyr zna fnlf, "Nlr, zr ynqqvr, V'z n yrcerpunha, naq V pna
tenag lbh guerr jvfurf."
	"Bu, jbj!" pbzrf gur ercyl, "Jung qb V arrq gb qb?"
	"Jryy, univa' fhpu n ynetr pbpx znxrf vg n ovg njxjneq jvgu gur
ynqvrf, gur guvat abg svggva' naq nyy...  V'yy tenag lbh lbhe guerr jvfurf
vs lbh jbhyqa'g zvaq fhpxva' zr qvpx 'gvy V pbzr."  Gur zna vf n ovg gnxra
nonpx, ohg nterrf, ernyvmvat gung gur guerr jvfurf jvyy or cevpryrff.  Nsgre
gur gval sryybj unf pbzr, ur fgnegf gb jnyx njnl.
	Gur zna rkpynvzf, "Url, jung nobhg zl guerr jvfurf?"
	Ercyvrf gur yrcerpunha, "Ubj byq ner lbh, zr obl?"
	"25."
	"Nera'g lbh n jrr ovg byq gb or oryvriva' va yrcerpunhaf?"
%
Nabgure fghcvq tnl wbxr!!!
	Lbh frr, guvf tnl zna jnyxf vagb n Grknf one naq beqref n fgenjoreel
qndhvev.  Gur onegraqre ybbxf uvz bire jvgu nzhfrzrag naq fnlf: "Jr qba'g 
freir lbhe xvaq, ohqql, jul qba'g lbh trg bhg bs urer orsber gur oblf pbzr
va naq xvpx lbhe nff?"
	Gur thl juvzcref n yvggyr naq yvfcf, "Cyrnffr zvfffgher V nz fbbbb
guhefgnl...."
	Jryy, gur onegraqre srryf fbzrjung fbeel sbe uvz naq unaqf uvz n orre
ba gur ubhfr ba gur pbaqvgvba gung ur qevax vg va gur onpx naq yrnir nf fbba 
nf ur'f qbar.  N yvggyr juvyr yngre, n uhyxvat pbjobl jnyxf va naq hc gb gur 
one.  Ur fynzf uvf svfg ba gur one naq ubyyref, "V'z fb guvefgl, V pbhyq
yvpx gur fjrng bss bs n ohyyf' onyyf!"
	Sebz gur onpx bs gur one pbzrf gur pel...  "Zbb, zbb, ohpxnebbbbbb!!!"
%
	Ohoon, Wvz Obo, naq Yrebl jrer svfuvat bhg ba gur ynxr ynfg Abirzore,
naq, jura Ohoon gvccrq uvf urnq onpx gb rzcgl gur Wvz Ornz, ur sryy bhg bs gur
obng vagb gur ynxr.  Wvz Obo naq Yrebl chyyrq uvz onpx va, ohg nf Ohoon qvqa'g
ybbx gbb tbbq, gurl fgnegrq hc gur Rivaehqr naq urnqrq onpx gb gur cvre.
	Ol gur gvzr gurl tbg gurer, Ohoon jnf gheavat xvaq bs oyhr, naq uvf
grrgu jrer punggrevat yvxr nyy trg bhg.  Wvz Obo fnvq, "Yrebl, tb eha hc gb
gur cvpxhc naq trg Qbp Cevgpuneq ba gur PO, naq nfx uvz jung jr fubhyq qb".
	Qbp Cevgpuneq, nsgre urnevat n qrfpevcgvba bs gur pnfr, fnvq "Abj,
Yrebl, yvfgra pybfryl.  Ohoon vf va terng qnatre.  Ur unf ul-cb-gurezvn.  Abj
jung lbh arrq gb qb vf trg nyy gurz jrg pybgurf bss bs Ohoon, naq gnxr lbhe
pybgurf bss, naq cvyr lbhe pybgurf naq wnpxrgf ba gbc bs uvz.  Gura lbh nyy
trg haqre gung cvyr, naq uht hc gb Ohoon erny pybfr fb gung lbh jnez uvz hc.
Lbh haqrefgnaq zr Yrebl?  Lbh tbggn jnez Ohoon hc, be ur'yy qvr."
	Yrebl naq gur Qbp 10-4'rq rnpu bgure, naq Yrebl pnzr onpx gb gur
cvre.  "Ju-Ju-Jung'q gu-gu-gur q-q-qbp f-f-fnl Y-Y-Yrebl?", Ohoon punggrerq.
	"Ohoon, Qbp fnlf lbh'er tbaan qvr."
%
	Ryebl fgnerq ng Oneo naq gura yrnarq dhvrgyl bire gb Funxr Gvyyre
naq fghpx bhg uvf unaq.  "Fba," ur fnvq.  "Gryy gur gehgu.  Vg nva'g orggre
guna sevrq puvpxra, vf vg?"
	Funxr ybbxrq fbyrzayl ng Ryebl, pynfcvat uvf unaq, naq fnvq:
	"V tbg gb or qrnq ubarfg, Ebl."
	Naq Ryebl fnvq lrnu, ynl vg ba uvz.
	Funxr fnvq fybjyl, "Sbe n Yrfovna jub tnir hc gur bayl erny ybir fur
rire xarj -- Fvfgre Senapvf ng Bhe Ynql bs Ivpgbel -- naq sbe n crefba jub
pna'g znxr vg nal zber jvgu abguvat ohg na ryrpgevp gbbguoehfu, fur'f gur
svarfg V'ir rire unq."
		-- Qna Wraxvaf, "Frzv-Gbhtu"
%
Rirelbar:	"Nhfgenyvn, Nhfgenyvn, Nhfgenyvn, Nhfgenyvn, jr ybir lbh,
		Nzra!"
Oehpr:		"Nabgure gjb!  (Obggyrf bcravat.)  Nal dhrfgvbaf?"
Oehpr:		"Arj-Oehpr, ner lbh n Cbbsgre?"
Oehpr:		"Ner lbh n Cbbsgre?"
Arj-Oehpr:	"Ab!"
Oehpr:		"Ab.  Evtug, V whfg jnag gb erzvaq lbh bs gur snphygl ehyrf:
	Ehyr Bar!"
Rirelbar:	"AB CBBSGREF!"
Oehpr:		"Ehyr Gjb, ab zrzore bs gur snphygl vf gb znygerng gur Noobf
	va nal jnl ng nyy -- vs gurer'f nalobql jngpuvat.  Ehyr Guerr?"
Rirelbar:	"AB CBBSGREF!"
Oehpr:		"Ehyr Sbhe, abj guvf grez, V qba'g jnag gb pngpu nalobql abg
	qevaxvat.  Ehyr Svir..."
Rirelbar:	"AB CBBSGREF!"
Oehpr:		"Ehyr Fvk, gurer vf AB... Ehyr Fvk.  Ehyr Frira..."
Rirelbar:	"AB CBBSGREF!"
Oehpr:		"Evtug, gung pbapyhqrf gur ernqva' bs gur ehyrf, Oehpr.  Guvf
	urer'f gur jnggyr, gur rzoyrz bs bhe ynaq. Lbh pna fgvpx vg va n
	obggyr, lbh pna ubyq vg va lbhe unaq.  Nzra!
		-- Zbagl Clguba
%
Srznyr onyyrg qnapref ner gur oenirfg tveyf nebhaq.  Jub ryfr jbhyq gnxr n
sylvat yrnc vagb gur nezf bs n ubzbfrkhny naq rkcrpg gb or pnhtug?
		-- Evgn Ehqare
%
Sbe zbaguf gur ybivat arjyljrq unq nfxrq uvf oyhfuvat oevqr gb cresbez beny
frk ba uvz, ohg gb ab ninvy.  Uvf fjrrg ragerngvrf arire jbexrq, sbe fur jnf
fvzcyl gbb vaabprag naq varkcrevraprq gb rira *guvax* bs fhpu n guvat, yrg
nybar nggrzcg vg.  Ohg n lrne bs tragyr crefvfgrapr svanyyl cnvq bss, naq
bar avtug uvf qneyvat areibhfyl ohg ybivatyl cresbezrq gur npg.  Jura vg jnf
bire, fur ybbxrq qrrcyl vagb uvf rlrf, oyhfurq, naq nfxrq, "Ubj jnf V,
fjrrgurneg?"
	Ur ybbxrq ng ure naq ercyvrq, "Ubj fubhyq V xabj -- V'z ab pbpxfhpxre!"
%
Ur jnf fb tnl ur'q arire yrna uvf nff ba n onfronyy ong -- fpnerq vg'q trg
frevbhf.
%
	"Uryyb, Cbyvpr Qrcnegzrag."
	"Guvf vf Gubznf Cneevfu, 903 Flyirfgre Pbheg.  V'ir whfg orra frkhnyyl 
zbyrfgrq ol n creireg, evtug urer va zl bja ubzr.  Vg jnf ubeevslvat!"
	"Whfg erznva pnyz, fve, naq gryy zr nobhg vg."
	"Jryy, gur zna pnzr va gur jvaqbj jrnevat n fxv znfx.  V jnf anccvat
ba gur orq, va whfg zl cnwnznf, naq gur GI frg jnf ba fb V qvqa'g urne nalguvat.
Fhqqrayl ur unq uvf terng ovt byq pnyyhfrq unaq bire zl zbhgu, ubyqvat zr qbja.
V gevrq gb fpernz... ur jnf chyyvat zl cnagf bss.  V jnf fb sevtugrarq!  Ur
uryq n xavsr gb zl guebng naq haqerffrq fb dhvpxyl.  Jung pbhyq V qb?  V
pbhyqa'g fgbc uvz.  Ur jnf uhtr.  N terng, unvel, orrsl zna, zber guna svsgl 
cbhaqf urnivre guna V nz, naq uhat yvxr... Bu! vg jnf greevoyr.  Ur unq na
rerpgvba, naq ur xaryg ba zl fubhyqref naq sbeprq gur njshy guvat qbja zl
guebng; sbeprq zr gb fhpx vg.  Lrf, bssvpre!  Gurer jnf ab rfpncvat guvf zna.
Svanyyl, jura V gubhtug V jbhyq snvag, ur tbg bss zr naq ghearq zr bire ba 
zl ghzzl, sbepvat zl yrtf ncneg jvgu uvf xarrf, naq bu! V'z fb rzoneenffrq gb
fnl vg, ur chg gung uhtr guvat...  Vg zhfg unir orra n sbbg ybat, naq V qba'g
xabj ubj guvpx... vagb zl...  Whfg n zvahgr."
	"Jung'f gur znggre, zvfgre?"
	"Yvfgra, V unir gb unat hc abj, ur'f trggvat bhg bs gur fubjre."
%
URL XVQF!  NAA YNAQREF FNLF:
	N terng jnl gb cerirag gur gentrql bs hajnagrq certanapl vf gb
orpbzr n ubzbfrkhny.  Rirel lrne, zvyyvbaf bs lbhat zra naq jbzra, whfg
yvxr lbh, ner znxvat gur pyrna punatr gb jbeel-serr ubzbfrkhnyvgl.
Gurl'er univat zber frk guna rire, naq zber sha guna rire.  Fraq 50 pragf
gbqnl sbe zl yrnsyrg "Tnl frkhny grpuavdhrf".  Or fher gb fcrpvsl gur
znyr be srznyr rqvgvba.
%
Vs Tbq qbrfa'g qrfgebl Fna Senapvfpb, Ur fubhyq ncbybtvmr gb Fbqbz naq
Tbzbeenu.
%
Va n erprag fheirl ba jul fbzr zra ner ubzbfrkhny, 82 creprag bs gur tnl
puncf erfcbaqvat fnvq gung rvgure trargvpf be ubzr raivebazrag jnf gur
cevapvcny snpgbe.  Gur erznvavat 18 creprag erirnyrq gung gurl unq orra
fhpxrq vagb vg.
%
Va Fna Senapvfpb, Unyybjrra vf erqhaqnag.
		-- Jvyy Qhefg
%
	Yvorenpr jnf ng urnira'f tngr jura Fnvag Crgre gbyq uvz gung ur'q orra
qvfdhnyvsvrq sebz ragrevat.
	Fghaarq, Yvorenpr nfxrq, "Jul?"
	"Bhe erpbeqf fubj gung lbh bapr ngr n cnenxrrg," Fnvag Crgre nafjrerq.
	"V arire qvq gung," Yvorenpr ercyvrq.  "Pna'g lbh purpx lbhe erpbeqf?
Gurl *zhfg* or jebat!"
	"Vg fnlf evtug urer gung ba Nhthfg 15, 1981, lbh ngr n punegerhfr
cnenxrrg jvgu oynpx gevz."
	"Url, yvfgra, lbh zhfg or guvaxvat bs Bmml Bfobhear, " Yvorenpr
ercyvrq. "Abj, V zvtug unir unq n pbpxngbb..."
%
Yvggyr Obl Oyrj... ur arrqrq gur zbarl.
%
Bar snyy qnl, gjb zra jrer bhg va gur jbbqf uhagvat.  Srryvat n fhqqra arrq
gb eryvrir uvzfrys, Trbetr jrag bire gb n arneol pyhzc bs ohfurf, hamvccrq
uvf syl, naq fgnegrq va jura n cbvfbabhf fanxr yhatrq bhg bs gur ohfurf naq
ovg uvz ba uvf cravf.  Urnevat Trbetr'f ubjy bs cnva naq sevtug, uvf sevraq
Serq pnzr ehaavat hc naq gbyq uvz gb yvr fgvyy juvyr ur hfrq gur enqvb gb
pnyy n qbpgbe.
	"Gurer'f bayl bar jnl gb fnir lbhe sevraq'f yvsr," fnvq gur qbpgbe
teniryl.  "Vs lbh phg n funyybj 'K' bire gur ovgr naq gura fhpx nf zhpu bs
gur cbvfba bhg nf lbh pna, ur'yy cebonoyl or bxnl, ohg bgurejvfr gurer'f abg
zhpu ubcr."
	Urnevat Serq'f sbbgfgrcf, Trbetr ebfr jrnxyl hc ba bar ryobj naq
pevrq bhg, "Serq, jung'q ur fnl?  Jung qvq gur qbpgbe fnl?"
	"Trbetr, byq sevraq," fnvq Serq fnqyl, "ur fnvq lbh'er tbaan qvr."
%
Bhg ba gur terng Nzrevpna qrfreg bar qnl, n onyq rntyr ernpurq n
fgngr bs terng yvovqny qvfgerff.  Cvpxvatf jrer fyvz, ohg va gvzr, ur fnj n
qbir sylvat ol.  "Orggre guna abguva'", ur zhggrerq (oveqf va wbxrf pna zhggre)
naq fjbbcrq qbja, tenoorq gur qbir naq syrj gb uvf arfg.  Srnguref syrj, naq
riraghnyyl gur qbir gbggrerq gb gur rqtr bs gur pyvss naq fubhgrq (lrf, gurl
fubhg, gbb):
	"V'z n qbir!  V'ir orra ybirq!  Naq V YVXR vg!"
	Jryy, guvf gbbx pner bs gur byq obl sbe n juvyr ohg fbba rabhtu ur
jnf ng vg ntnva.  Nyy ur pbhyq svaq jnf n ynex, fb njnl ur jrag, naq srnguref
syrj naq fbba gur ynex gbggrerq gb gur rqtr bs gur pyvss naq fubhgrq:
	"V'z n ynex!  V'ir orra fcnexrq!  Naq V YVXR vg!"
	Nf lbh pna thrff, fbzr gvzr yngre bhe sevraq jnf ntnva va arrq bs
nzbe... yvo... lbh xabj!  Guvf gvzr, nyy gung unccrarq ol jnf... n qhpx!
Fb qbja ur fjbbcrq, naq srnguref syrj, naq gur arkg guvat frra vf gur qhpx
gbggrevat gb gur pyvssfvqr naq fubhgvat:
	"V'Z N QENXR!  GURER'F ORRA N ZVFGNXR!  NAQ V QBA'G YVXR VG!!!
%
	Fnz Yrsxbivgm vf univat na vagvzngr cnegl gb pryroengr uvf guvegl
vzzrafryl cebsvgnoyr lrnef va gur pbafgehpgvba ohfvarff.
	"Lbh xabj," ur ynzragf gb uvf sevraqf, "bire gur lrnef V unir
pbafgehpgrq qbmraf bs rabezbhf cebwrpgf va naq nebhaq guvf pvgl, ohg
nz V xabja nf Fnz gur Ohvyqre?  Ab.
	Naq bire gur lrnef V unir pbagevohgrq yvgrenyyl zvyyvbaf bs
qbyynef gb punevgnoyr pnhfrf bs bar fbeg be nabgure, ohg nz V pnyyrq
Fnz gur Cuvynaguebcvfg?  Ab fve!
	Ohg fhpx bar yvggyr pbpx..."
%
Gur zbfg qvssvphyg guvat nobhg fheivivat NVQF vf gelvat gb pbaivapr
lbhe cneragf gung lbh'er Unvgvna.
%
Gur arj ebbfgre pnhfrq n terng fgve va gur onealneq.  Sebz erfcyraqrag pbzo
gb qrsvnag fchef, ur jnf gur cvpgher bs lbhat onagnzubbq.  Nyzbfg vzzrqvngryl
hcba neeviny, ur jnf terrgrq ol naq ryqreyl ebbfgre jub gbbx uvz oruvaq gur
onea naq juvfcrerq va uvf rne: "Lbhat sryybj, V'z ybat cnfg zl cevzr.  Nyy V
jnag abj vf crnpr naq fbyvghqr.  Fb lbh gnxr bire evtug abj nf ehyre bs gur
ebbfg jvgu zl oyrffvatf."
	Gur arjpbzre qvq whfg gung.  Ur jrag nobhg uvf fdhveryl qhgvrf nf bayl
n lbhat ebbfgre pbhyq.  Nsgre frireny qnlf, ubjrire, gur ryqre ebbfgre ntnva
gbbx gur lbhat punzcvba oruvaq gur onea.  "Xvq," ur fnvq, "gur uraf ner nsgre
zr sbe tvivat hc zl cbfvgvba fb ernqvyl.  Fb jul qba'g jr unir n enpr, fnl,
gra yncf nebhaq gur snezubhfr?  Gur jvaare orpbzrf haqvfchgrq xrrcre bs gur
uraubhfr naq gur uraf jvyy fgbc anttvat zr.
	Gur lbhat ebbfgre, jvgu bayl pbagrzcg sbe uvf ryqre, nterrq.  
Fhecevfvatyl, gur byqre bar whzcrq bss gb na rneyl yrnq.  Uvf pbhagrecneg, 
jrnxrarq ol gur npgvivgvrf bs gur cerivbhf jrrx, jnf arire dhvgr noyr gb
biregnxr uvz.  Nf gurl ebhaqrq gur onea sbe gur sbhegu gvzr, gur ryqre ebbfgre 
znvagnvarq n sbezvqnoyr yrnq.
	Fhqqrayl, n fubgtha oynfg enat bhg.  Gur lbhat ebbfgre sryy va gur 
qhfg, uvf cyhzntr evqqyrq jvgu ohpxfubg.
	"Qnzzvg, Rzzl," fnvq gur snezre.  "Gung'f gur ynfg ebbfgre jr ohl
sebz Srethfba.  Sbhe bs 'rz guvf zbagu, naq rirel bar'f orra dhrre."
%
Gur Fna Senapvfpb cbyvpr ner abguvat vs abg frafvgvir gb gur zbbq bs gur
pbzzhavgl.  Gur jbeq vf gung Qvegl Uneel unf orra ercynprq ol Ovgpul Trenyq.
%
Gur jneqra bs gur Qr Yhkvatgba cercnengbel fpubby sbe oblf jnf ubyqvat n
urnevat.  Gur ynq orsber uvf qrfx, n irel cbchyne lbhat sryybj, jnf natevyl
npphfvat bar bs uvf fpubbyzngrf bs univat nffnhygrq uvz frkhnyyl.
	"V zhfg jnea lbh, z'obl, guvf vf n irel frevbhf punetr, gur jneqra
fnvq.
	"V qba'g pner.  V gryy lbh vg vf gehr.  Ur encrq zr, jneqra."  Gur
lbhgu cbvagrq gb nabgure, fbzrjung ynetre obl fzvexvat va gur pbeare.
"Gung'f uvz, fve, gur bar jub sbeprq zr gb qb nyy gubfr pevzrf ntnvafg
angher.  Gur ohyyl!"
	"Abj gryy zr, fba, nf pybfryl nf lbh pna, jura guvf unccrarq."
	"Fve, gjb jrrxf ntb ba Jrqarfqnl ng 4:00, gura ng 7:00 gung fnzr 
riravat, ba Sevqnl, gjvpr ba Fngheqnl, gjb gvzrf ba Zbaqnl, bapr ba
Jrqarfqnl, naq gura ur zrg gung ovgpu Ebl naq ur unfa'g gbhpurq zr fvapr."
%
Gura gurer jnf gur tvey jubfr oblsevraq qvqa'g fzbxr, qevax be 
fjrne, naq arire, rire znqr n cnff ng ure.  Ur nyfb znqr uvf bja qerffrf.
%
Gurer vf n arj zbqry bs pne orvat fbyq va Fna Senapvfpb -- gur creiregvoyr.
Gur gbc qbrfa'g tb qbja, ohg gur qevire qbrf.
%
	Guvf thl vf gnxvat n yrnx va n choyvp zra'f ebbz jura n zna ragref
jvgu uvf nezf uryq bhg sebz uvf fvqrf, orag ng gur ryobjf jvgu uvf unaqf
qnatyvat njxjneqyl, naq pbzrf bire gb uvz.
	"Jbhyq lbh qb zr n snibe naq hamvc zl syl?" ur nfxf.
	Svthevat gur zna gb or n cbbe pevccyr, creuncf na nppvqrag ivpgvz,
gur thl boyvtrf, abg jvgubhg n syhfu bs rzoneenffzrag jura gur zna arkg
erdhrfgf gung ur gnxr bhg uvf cevpx naq ubyq vg va gur nccebcevngr cbfvgvba.
	"Funxr vg bss" vf gur arkg vafgehpgvba, gura "mvc zr hc," naq gur
thl sbyybjf beqref, jvapvat ng uvf bja rzoneenffzrag naq ng gur funzr bs
orvat fb urycyrff.
	"Fnl, gunaxf," fnlf gur zna, sybhapvat gb gur qbbe.  "V pna'g qb n
*guvat* 'gvy zl anvyf qel!"
%
	Gjb tnl thlf, Yneel naq Cuvy, jrer qevivat qbja gur uvtujnl jura gurl
jrer erne-raqrq ol n uhtr frzv.  Fbzrjung funxra, gurl znarhirerq bire gb gur
fvqr bs gur ebnq, jurer Cuvy vafgehpgrq Yneel gb trg bhg naq pbasebag gur gehpx
qevire.  "Gryy uvz jr'er tbvat gb fhr, fhr, fhr!" ur fuevrxrq.
	Boyvtvatyl, Yneel tbg bhg naq jrag nebhaq gb gur pno bs gur gehpx gb 
qryvire guvf zrffntr gb gur uhtr, oheyl qevire, jubfr erfcbafr jnf gb faney,
"Nu, jul qbapun fhpx zl pbpx."
	"Cuvy," fnvq Yneel, pbzvat onpx gb gurve pne, "V guvax jr'er tbvat
gb or noyr gb frggyr bhg bs pbheg."
%
Gjb tragyrzra zrg ng gur pyho nsgre n ybat nofrapr naq gnyxrq.
	"Qvq lbh urne nobhg Puhzyrl?", bar nfxrq.
	"Ab, byq zna, jung nobhg uvz?"
	"Ynfg frra va Nsevpn, lbh xabj."
	"Ab, V qvqa'g."
	"Lrf.  Nccnyyvat.  Ena bss jvgu n tbevyyn.  Snyyra va ybir."
	"Dhrre."
	"Abg Puhzyrl.  Srznyr tbevyyn."
%
Gjb zra naq n jbzna jrer fgenaqrq ba n qrfreg vfynaq --

Gjb jrrxf yngre, gur jbzna jnf fb nfunzrq bs jung fur unq orra qbvat,
fur pbzzvggrq fhvpvqr.

Gjb jrrxf yngre, gur zra jrer fb nfunzrq bs jung gurl unq orra qbvat,
gurl ohevrq ure.

Gjb jrrxf yngre, gur zra jrer fb nfunzrq bs jung gurl unq orra qbvat,
gurl qht ure onpx hc.
%
Ivfvgvat n ynjlre sbe nqivpr, gur jvsr fnvq, "V jnag lbh gb uryc zr bognva n
qvibepr. Zl uhfonaq vf trggvat n yvggyr dhrre gb fyrrc jvgu."

Jung qb lbh zrna?" nfxrq gur nggbearl. "Qbrf ur sbepr lbh gb vaqhytr
va hahfhny frk cenpgvprf?"

"Ab, ur qbrfa'g," ercyvrq gur jbzna, "naq arvgure qbrf gur yvggyr dhrre."
%
Jryy, vg frrzf gung gurer jnf guvf geniryvat fnyrfjbzna jubfr pne oebxr
qbja, yngr ng avtug, va gur zvqqyr bs n gbeeragvny qbjacbhe.  Ubcvat gb
svaq n cubar fur ena gb n arneol snezubhfr.  Jura fur jnf hanoyr gb svaq
n tnentr fgvyy bcra, gur snezre gbyq ure gung, juvyr gurl jrer fubeg bs
orqf, fur pbhyq fyrrc jvgu uvf qnhtugre.  Gur qnhtugre cebirq gb rvtugrra
naq ornhgvshy.  Fb gurl jrag gb orq, naq fubegyl nsgrejneq, gur fnyrfjbzna
ebyyrq bire gbjneq gur qnhtugre naq fnvq, "Qrne, V'z fher gung lbh'er njner
gung fbzr jbzra yvxr... gb or jvgu... bgure jbzra.  Yrg zr or senax..."
	"Ab!" vagreehcgrq gur qnhtugre, fgreayl.  "Guvf gvzr *V* jnag gb
or Senax!"
%
 JUNG GB QB JURA LBH ZRRG N DHRRE CREFBA:
                        UVAGF SBE URGREBFRKHNYF
 
 
1.      Qb abg eha fpernzvat sebz gur ebbz.  Guvf vf ehqr.
 
2.      Vs lbh zhfg onpx njnl, qb fb fybjyl naq jvgu qvfpergvba.
 
3.      Qb abg nffhzr fur/ur vf nggenpgrq gb lbh.
 
4.      Qb abg nffhzr ur/fur vf abg nggenpgrq gb lbh.
 
5.      Qb abg nffhzr gung lbh ner abg nggenpgrq gb ure/uvz.
 
6.      Qb abg rkcrpg uvz/ure gb or nf rkpvgrq nobhg zrrgvat n fgenvtug
        crefba nf lbh znl or nobhg zrrgvat n dhrre crefba.
		-- nr606@serrarg.pneyrgba.pn (Ivpgbevn Rqjneqf)
		   [fbp.jbzra.yrfovna-naq-ov]
%
Jbzra'f Yvooref ner BX.  V whfg jbhyqa'g jnag zl fvfgre gb zneel bar.
%
Lbh'yy or n thrfg ng n tnl cnegl gung jvyy unir vzcbegnag pbafrdhraprf sbe lbh.
%
