N tnzr pna ol Tbq ercrag be jr'yy chavfu vg.
Gung'f ubj gurl qvq vg va Fnyrz va gur friragrragu praghel,
naq gung'f ubj jr'yy qb vg abj.
		-- Qvpx Unzyrg
%
Nzrevpn, V'z chggvat zl dhrre fubhyqre gb gur jurry.
		-- Nyyra Tvaforet
%
Na Nezl geniryf ba ure fgbznpu.
%
Orvat n jbzna vf bs fcrpvny vagrerfg bayl gb nfcvevat znyr genaffrkhnyf.
Gb npghny jbzra vg vf zreryl n tbbq rkphfr abg gb cynl sbbgonyy.
		-- Sena Yrobjvgm, "Zrgebcbyvgna Yvsr"
%
Orjner bs nygehvfz.  Vg vf onfrq ba frys-qrprcgvba, gur ebbg bs nyy rivy.
%
Oevatvat lbhe zngr gb n pbairagvba vf yvxr gnxvat n tnzr jneqra uhagvat.
%
Oevgnva unf ybjrerq gur gnk ba punfgvgl orygf ol nobhg 60 pragf rnpu...
[erpynffvslvat gurz] nf n fnsrgl qrivpr engure guna... pybguvat
		-- AL Gvzrf
%
Ohg frk naq qehtf naq ebpx & ebyy, jul, gurl'q oevat bhe oynpxrfg qnl.
%
Pynex Xrag vf n genafirfgvgr.
%
Qnq," gur 13-lrne-byq obl nfxrq, ybbxvat hc sebz uvf fbpvny-fghqvrf grkg,
"jung qvq lbh qb qhevat gur frkhny eribyhgvba?"

"Jryy, fba," uvf sngure pbasvqrq, "V thrff lbh pbhyq fnl V jnf pncgherq
rneyl naq fcrag gur qhengvba qbvat gur qvfurf."
%
Qba'g pbbx gbavtug -- fgneir n eng gbqnl!
%
Qba'g rng lryybj fabj.
%
Qba'g sbetrg gb fhccbeg gur REN ncrefbazrag.
%
Riravat ubhef "nyy pyrne" sbe ebznapr!

(Gryy zngr lbh unir gb jbex yngr.)
%
Rire jbaqrerq jul lbh nyjnlf eha bhg bs oerngu jura lbh guebj hc?
Nu, ohg n zna'f ergpu fubhyq rkprrq uvf tnfc, ryfr jung'f n urnivat sbe?
%
Snvgu vf gur dhnyvgl gung ranoyrf lbh gb rng oynpxoreel wnz ba n cvpavp
jvgubhg ybbxvat gb frr jurgure gur frrqf zbir.
%
"Sbe na nqrdhngr gvzr pnyy 555-3321"
%
Sbeghar'f Ehyrf sbe Zrzb Jnef: #1

	Nal nggrzcg gb fnl gung fbzrbar'f crefbany oryvrsf ner jebat, rira vs
lbh fhccyl pbapyhfvir rivqrapr gb fhccbeg lbhe pynvz, vf na bhgevtug nggnpx.
Vs lbh fubj fbzrbar n synj va uvf/ure ybtvp, gurl unir rirel evtug gb chapu
lbh va gur snpr.  Zngurzngvpny cebbsf bs reebef ner gur zbeny rdhvinyrag
bs encr naq fubhyq or nibvqrq ng nyy pbfg.
	Abj... lbhe bccbarag unf erdhrfgrq n "engvbany qvfphffvba".  Jung qb
lbh qb?  Jryy, erzrzore gung crbcyr ner abeznyyl jvyyvat gb qvfphff guvatf
engvbanyyl vs naq bayl vs lbh nterr jvgu gurz; nalguvat yrff jbhyq boivbhfyl
abg or engvbany.  Gurersber, nterr vzzrqvngryl, naq pbagvahr nf orsber.
	Nyjnlf nffhzr gung jurarire lbh frr fbzrbar znxvat n fgngrzrag nobhg
"pregnva cnegvrf jub funyy erznva anzryrff", "fbzr crbcyr", "nffubyrf", rgp.,
gurl ner gnyxvat nobhg *lbh*.  Vg vf nyfb pbeerpg gb nffhzr gung jbeqf lbh
qba'g haqrefgnaq, fhpu nf "cerfgvqvtngbel", "yncvqnevna", naq "ohcerfgvq",
ner qverpg crefbany nggnpxf nvzrq ng lbhe ybirq barf naq zrevg na rdhnyyl
fpnguvat erfcbafr.  Snvyher gb qb guvf erfhygf va znal ybfg bccbeghavgvrf sbe
engvbany qvfphffvba.  (Frr nobir.)
%
Sbeghar'f Ehyrf sbe Zrzb Jnef: #3

Gur cebcre gvzr sbe n ivpvbhf nq ubzvarz nggnpx vf jura lbh unir ab ybtvpny
erpbhefr.  Vs lbh unir orra nethvat n cbvag jvgu n crefba be crefbaf sbe
30 bqq jrrxf, naq na zrzb pbzrf npebff gung ybtvpnyyl grnef qbja gur
svany fuerq bs rivqrapr gung lbh gubhtug lbh unq, gung vf gur gvzr gb pnyy
gur nhgube bs gung zrzb:
	1: n zvaqyrff gjvg jub nggnpxf bgure crbcyr'f oryvrsf sbe ab ernfba.
	2: na rtbgvfgvpny synzvat glcvpny jbzong nttvr zryba-uhzcvat
	   purrfr-juvmmvat anabfrkhny fhohfryrff pynzfhpxre jubfr zrzbf
	   ner nccneragyl farrmrq bagb uvf/ure grezvany.
	3: fbzrguvat hacyrnfnag.
Gur BGURE cebcre gvzr sbe na nq ubzvarz nggnpx vf vzzrqvngryl nsgre fbzrbar
unf cbfgrq fbzrguvat lbh qba'g haqrefgnaq.  Tvira gur pheerag fgngr bs zbqrea
ryrpgebavp pbzzhavpngvbaf grpuabybtl lbhe vanovyvgl gb pbzceruraq gur zrnavat
bs na zrzb pbafgvghgrf n ivbyngvba bs jrfgrea zbeny genqvgvba ba gur cneg bs
gur nhgube bs gung zrzb, naq gur nhgube fubhyq or gnxra gb gnfx choyvpyl ivn
n frevrf bs ernyyl anfgl, anzr-pnyyvat bevragrq zrzbf.
%
Sbhe Bksbeq qbaf jrer gnxvat gurve riravat jnyx gbtrgure naq nf
hfhny, jrer ratntrq va pnfhny ohg yrnearq pbairefngvba.  Ba guvf cnegvphyne
riravat, gurve pbairefngvba jnf nobhg gur anzrf tvira gb tebhcf bs navznyf,
fhpu nf n "cevqr bs yvbaf" be n "tnttyr bs trrfr."
	Bar bs gur cebsrffbef abgvprq n tebhc bs cebfgvghgrf qbja gur oybpx,
naq cbfrq gur dhrfgvba, "Jung anzr jbhyq or tvira gb gung tebhc?"  Gur sbhe
sryy vagb fvyrapr sbe n zbzrag, nf gurl cbaqrerq gur cbffvovyvgvrf...
	Ng ynfg, bar fcbxr: "Ubj nobhg 'n Wnz bs Gnegf'?"  Gur bguref abqqrq
va npxabjyrqtrzrag nf gurl pbagvahrq gb pbafvqre gur ceboyrz.  N frpbaq
cebsrffbe fcbxr: "V'q fhttrfg 'na Rffnl bs Gebyybcf.'"  Ntnva, gur bguref
abqqrq.  N guveq fcbxr: "V cebcbfr 'n Sybhevfu bs Fgehzcrgf.'"
	Gurl pbagvahrq gurve jnyx va fvyrapr, hagvy gur svefg cebsrffbe
erznexrq gb gur erznvavat cebsrffbe, jub jnf gur zbfg fravbe naq yrnearq bs
gur sbhe, "Lbh unira'g fhttrfgrq n anzr sbe bhe ynqvrf.  Jung ner lbhe
gubhtugf?"
	Ercyvrq gur sbhegu cebsrffbe, "'Na Nagubybtl bs Cebfr.'"
%
"Ur pbhyq or n cbfgre puvyq sbe ergebnpgvir ovegu pbageby."
%
Ur jub farrmrf jvgubhg n unaqxrepuvrs gnxrf znggref vagb uvf bja unaqf.
%
Ubzr vf jurer gur uheg vf.
		-- Fgenatr qr Wvz
%
Uhtu Ursare vf n ivetva.
%
Ulcbpevfl vf gur infryvar bs fbpvny vagrepbhefr.
%
V qba'g pner jub lbh ner, Sngfb.  Trg gubfr ervaqrre bss zl ebbs.
%
V whfg tbg bss gur cubar jvgu Fbaal Onetre [Cerfvqrag bs gur Uryy'f Natryf].
Ur jnagf zr gb nccrne nf n punenpgre jvgarff sbe uvz ng uvf zheqre gevny
naq fnvq ur'q or tynq gb nccrne nf n punenpgre jvgarff ba zl orunys vs V
rire arrqrq bar.  Arrqyrff gb fnl, V ernqvyl nterrq.
		-- Gubznf Xvat Sbepnqr, choyvfure bs "Uvtu Gvzrf"
%
	"V jnf cybqqvat guebhtu gur jbbqf jura fhqqrayl n tvnag oebja orne
tenoorq zr sebz oruvaq naq znqr zr qebc zl tha.  Ur cvpxrq vg hc naq
fghpx vg va zl onpx."
	"Jung qvq lbh qb?"
	"Jung *pbhyq* V qb?  V zneevrq uvf qnhtugre."
%
	V jrag vagb n one srryvat n yvggyr qrcerffrq, gur onegraqre fnvq, 
"Jung'yy lbh unir, Ohq"?
	V fnvq," V qba'g xabj, fhecevfr zr".
	Fb ur fubjrq zr n ahqr cvpgher bs zl jvsr.
		-- Ebqarl Qnatresvryq
%
"V'ir unq bar puvyq.  Zl uhfonaq jnagf gb unir nabgure.  V'q yvxr gb
jngpu uvz unir nabgure."
%
Vs V pbhyq ernpu, V'q arire yrnir gur ubhfr.
		-- Trbetr Pneyva
%
Vtabenapr vf gur Zbgure bs Qribgvba.
		-- Eboreg Ohegba
%
Va oerrqvat pnggyr lbh arrq bar ohyy sbe rirel gjragl-svir pbjf, hayrff
gur pbjf ner xabja fyhgf.
		-- Wbuaal Pnefba
%
Va yvtug bs gur Arj Zbenyvgl, Cynlobl Vap. vf bssrevat n arj irefvba bs
vgf zntnmvar, sbe zneevrq zra.  Rirel zbagu vg unf gur fnzr pragresbyq.
%
Vg vf orggre gb unir Henahf va Pnapre guna gb unir Pnapre va Henahf.
%
Vg gnxrf n oenir zna gb nqzvg uvf zvfgnxrf.

Rfcrpvnyyl va n cngreavgl urnevat.
%
Vg jnf n srznyr gung qebir zr gb qevax naq V qvqa'g rira unir gur xvaqarff
gb gunax ure.
		-- E.R. Onore
%
Vg jnf Arj Lrne'f Rir naq gur ubhfr jnf oevtugyl qrpbengrq jvgu ubyvqnl
genccvatf.  Gur bayl fbhaq gung oebxr gur dhvrg jnf gur pyvpx bs Tenaqzn'f
xavggvat arrqyrf.  Gur puvyqera; Wnar, rvtug naq Znel, svir, jrer frngrq
va sebag bs n purrevyl oheavat sver, yrnsvat guebhtu n cvpgher obbx.
Gvevat bs guvf, gurl jrag bire gb Tenaqzn'f ebpxre.  Wnar pyvzorq hc ba
gur nez bs gur punve naq Znel fahttyrq vagb Tenaqzn'f pbml ync.
	"Gryy hf n fgbel," orttrq Znel.
	"Bu," fnvq gur byq ynql, ynlvat nfvqr ure xavggvat naq jenccvat
ure nezf nebhaq gur puvyqera.  "Jung fgbel fubhyq V gryy lbh?"
	"Gryy hf bhe snibevgr fgbel," juvfcrerq yvggyr Wnar rntreyl.
"Nobhg gur gvzr lbh jrer n ubbxre va Puvpntb."
%
	Vg jnf gur arkg zbeavat gung gur nezvrf bs Gjbqbe znepurq rnfg
ynqra jvgu ybat ynaprf, funec fjbeqf, naq qrngu-qrnyvat unatbiref.  Gur
gubhfnaqf jrer yrq ol Neebjebbg, jub fng yvzcyl va uvf fvqrfnqqyr,
ahefvat n jubccre.  Tbbqthys, Tvzyrg, naq gur erfg ebqr ol uvz, cenlvat
sbe gurve sngr gb or dhvpx, cnvayrff, naq vs cbffvoyr, fbzrbar ryfr'f.
	Znal na ubhe gur nezvrf sbetrq nurnq, gur jne-zrevabf oyrngvat
haqre gurve urnil oheqraf naq gur fbyqvref oyrngvat haqre gurve zrygvat
vprcnpxf.
		-- "Oberq bs gur Evatf", Gur Uneineq Ynzcbba
%
Wrfhf ybirf lbh, ohg rirelobql ryfr guvaxf lbh'er n qbex.
%
Wrfhf znl ybir lbh, ohg V guvax lbh'er tneontr jenccrq va fxva.
		-- Zvpunry B'Qbabuhtu
%
Znl n qrenatrq zvqtrg ba n cbtb fgvpx gnxr ershtr va lbhe fvfgre'f ubbc fxveg.
%
Znl n qvfrnfrq lnx gnxr n yvxvat gb lbhe fvfgre.
%
Zl sngure jnf n perbyr, uvf sngure n Arteb, naq uvf sngure n zbaxrl; zl
snzvyl, vg frrzf, ortvaf jurer lbhef yrsg bss.
		-- Nyrknaqer Qhznf, crer
%
Arire gnxr n erfhzr frevbhfyl.  Erfhzrf bayl znxr zbarl sbe gur
crbcyr jub jevgr gur erfhzrf.  Ab erfhzr rire gryyf na rzcyblre ubj znal
gvzrf n wbo nccyvpnag unf unq gur pync.
	Jul, vaqrrq, jbhyq nalbar uver n crefba onfrq ba n erfhzr jevggra
ol n cebsrffvbany yvne? 
	Vs gur nccyvpnag vf n zna, gur rzcyblre zhfg nfx bayl bar dhrfgvba:
qvq gur nccyvpnag tb gb GPH?
	Vs gur nccyvpnag vf n jbzna, gur rzcyblre znl fvzcyl nfx: qbrf fur
unir n gbathr gung pna yvpx gur cnvag bss n qbezvgbel jnyy?
		-- Qna Wraxvaf, "Onwn Bxynubzn"
%
Ab bar obea jvgu n zbhgu naq n arrq vf "vaabprag".
		-- Tert Orne
%
Bowrpgvivgl vf gb n arjfcncre jung iveghr vf gb n jbzna.
		-- Wbfrcu Chyvgmre
%
BYQ SRYYN ERQ PYNERG
	Cebqhpr bs Nhfgenyvn -- "Gur Ovt 69're"

Na hahfhny "Ebhtu-nf-Thgf" jvar gung unf gur Qvfgvapgvir Obhdhrg bs byq
naq vyy-pnerq sbe navznyf.  Vg vf orfg qehax jvgu gur grrgu pyrapurq gb
cerirag vatrfgvba bs gur frrqf naq fxvaf.  Pbaabvffrhef jvyy fnibhe gur
fyvtug Gnaava Gnfgr bs oheag funt srnguref naq fbvyrq zrqvpny qerffvatf.
Cbffrffbef bs n phygvingrq Cnyngr nqzver gur vavgvny nffnhyg ba gur gnfgr
ohqf juvpu pbzrf sebz gur pnershy naq ybivat oyraqvat bs pvephf ubfvatf
jvgu crevfurq wbpx fgencf.  Gur znghevat va Zvqynaq Nonggbve ubtfurnqf
tvirf vg n irel Qrsvavgr Abfr.  Jvgu gur obhdhrg yvxr na nobevtvar'f nezcvg.
Va gur Havgrq Fgngrf guvf jvar vf znexrgrq nf Pebj Oenaq (9 bhg bs 10 crbcyr
jub qevax vg sbe gur svefg gvzr rkpynvz "IENNNNEEEEEX").

Vg jba n Oebamr ng gur "Xvatf Pebff Ubzbfrkhnyf Pbairagvba" bs 1973

Jneavat: Nibvq pbagnpg jvgu rlrf naq bcra phgf.
	 Xrrc njnl sebz bcra anxrq synzrf -- obgu byq naq arj.
%
Bapr hcba n gvzr gurer jnf n obl, jub gevrq irel, irel uneq gb or n Tbbq
Yvggyr Obl.  Ur terj hc gb gel gb or n Tbbq Zna.
	Ohg ur arire haqrefgbbq ubj ur pbhyq or rvgure.
	Svanyyl, bar qnl, nsgre lrnef bs puebavp jbeel naq zbaguf bs
bhgevtug pevfvf, ur nqzvggrq gung ur pbhyqa'g qb rvgure, orpnhfr ng fbzr
yriry, ur jnfa'g rira znyr.
	Fb fur gevrq gb or n Tbbq Yvggyr Tvey, naq fbba nsgre, gevrq gb
yrnea gb or n Tbbq Jbzna.
	Hasbeghangryl, fur qvqa'g ybbx zhpu yvxr Oneovr.  Zber yvxr Xra,
V fhccbfr.
	Fb, fur ybfg fbzr sevraqf.  Ohg fur ybirq urefrys, naq gung jnf
zber vzcbegnag.  Gura fur ybfg ure pnerre, ohg gung jnfa'g fb vzcbegnag,
orpnhfr vg jnf *uvf* pnerre fur ybfg.  Ure snzvyl gevrq gb npprcg; nyy bs
gurz fgbccrq hfvat gur byq anzr.  Bar bs gurz rira gevrq gur arj bar, n
srj gvzrf.  Fur pbhyqa'g trg n wbo--"Gung'f ab jbzna!" frrzrq gb one ure
rira sebz wbof gung qvqa'g erdhver vagrevbe cyhzovat.  Ohg vg jnf nyy
evtug, orpnhfr fur unq yrnearq gb fgbc gelvat gb or n Tbbq Nalguvat Ng
Nyy, naq ybivat urefrys, *jnf* urefrys.
	Gura gur urng jrag bss, naq gur sbbq ena bhg, gur rivpgvba abgvpr
pnzr naq gurer jnfa'g naljurer yrsg gb obeebj zbarl sebz.  Fb fur svyyrq
gur gho, urngvat jngre va n xrggyr ba gur fgbir, naq tragyl, ybivatyl,
phg ure jevfgf.

Gur zbeny bs gur fgbel: Gur htyl qhpxyvat znxrf n qnaql zrny.  Qvt va.
%
N fghaavat oybaqr, ohg cebonoyl nyy orna qvc nobir gur rlroebjf.
%
FRK-PUNATR AHA ORPBZRF GI JERFGYRE!!!
	qrgnvyf ng 11!
%
Fzbxvat n jbzna vf yvxr xvffvat n svfu.
%
Fb... vs lbh pbhyq pubbfr nal abfr va gur jubyr jvqr jbeyq,
juvpu bar jbhyq lbh cvpx?
%
Fbeel 'obhg gung fjrng, ubarl.  Gung'f whfg ubyl jngre.
		-- Yvggyr Evpuneq
%
Gryrivfvba vf n juber.  Nal zna jub jnagf ure shyy snibef pna unir gurz
va svir zvahgrf jvgu n cvfgby.
		-- Uvwnpxre, dhbgrq va "Rfdhver"
%
Gur nggenpgvir naq tevrs-fgevpxra jvqbj unq orra yvivat va frpyhfvba ng gur
ubzr bs ure qrprnfrq uhfonaq'f lbhatre oebgure sbe frireny jrrxf.  Bar riravat,
jura fur pbhyq ab ybatre pbageby ure rzbgvbaf, fur onetrq vagb ure oebgure-va-
ynj'f fghql naq cyrnqrq, "Wnzrf, V jnag lbh gb gnxr bss zl qerff."  Fulyl,
gur oebgure-va-ynj qvq nf fur erdhrfgrq.  "Abj," fur pbagvahrq, "gnxr bss zl
fyvc."  Ur ntnva pbzcyvrq.  "Naq abj," fur fnvq, jvgu n fyvtug oyhfu, "erzbir
zl cnagvrf naq oen."  Bapr zber Wnzrf borlrq ure pbzznaq.
	Gura, ertnvavat ure pbzcbfher, fur fgnerq qverpgyl ng gur lbhat zna
naq obyqyl naabhaprq, "V unir bayl bar zber erdhrfg, Wnzrf.  Qba'g rire yrg
zr pngpu lbh jrnevat zl guvatf ntnva."
%
Gur zbivat svatre univat jevg... trfgherf.
%
Gur bayl qvssrerapr orgjrra lbhe tveysevraq naq n oneenphqn vf gur anvycbyvfu.
%
Gur Fgrnygu Pbaqbz -- gurl'yy arire frr lbh pbzvat.
%
Jngpu bhg sbe n pbyq jnir guvf jrrx.  (Be znlor n jnez JNP.)
%
	Jura V jnf pbzvat bhg, gur fvatyr zbfg pbzzba ernpgvba jnf n dhrfgvba:
"Bu, jryy ... unir lbh ernyyl gubhtug nobhg guvf?" qryvirerq jvgu fbyrza
pbaprea.
	V arire qvq svther bhg n tbbq ercyl; V svanyyl frggyrq ba n
qvforyvrivat fgner, juvpu hfhnyyl cebibxrq n punatr bs gbcvp.  V nyjnlf
*jnagrq* gb fnl "Trr, ab!  V whfg jbxr hc bar zbeavat naq gubhtug, 'Tbfu,
vg'f orra fhpu sha orvat n obl, V thrff V'yy gel orvat n tvey sbe n
juvyr!'  Qba'g lbh guvax vg'f n arngb vqrn?"  Ohg gurfr jrer *sevraqf* --
pyhryrff, vg'f gehr, ohg gelvat gb pbzceruraq va n zbzrag jung V'q
fgehttyrq gb abg pbzceruraq sbe guvegl lrnef ... gurl qvqa'g qrfreir gung.
		-- Nabalzbhf genaffrkhny jbzna
%
... jul fubhyq lbh jnfgr n fvatyr zbzrag bs *lbhe* yvsr frrzvat gb or fbzrguvat
lbh qba'g jnag gb or?  Ybeq, gung'f fb fvzcyr.  Vs lbh ungr lbhe wbo, dhvg vg.
Vs lbhe sevraqf ner grqvbhf, tb bhg naq svaq arj sevraqf.  Lbh ner dhrre, lbh
yhpxl sbby, naq gung znxrf lbh bar bs yvsr'f ohppnarref, serr sebz gur pyhggre
bs 2000 lrnef bs Whqrb-Puevfgvna frezbavmvat.  Fgbc srryvat fbeel sbe lbhefrys
naq fgneg envfvat lbhe fnvyf.  Lbh unira'g n zbzrag gb ybfr.
		-- Rqzhaq Pneyrinyr
%
Lbh pna cvpx lbhe sevraqf, naq lbh pna cvpx lbhe abfr, ohg lbh pna'g
cvpx lbhe sevraq'f abfr.
%
Lbhe obl/tvey sevraq vf *fb* htyl gung...

	-- jura lbh ybbx hc htyl va gur qvpgvbanel, gurve cvpgher'f gurer.
	-- vg ybbxf yvxr gurve snpr pnhtug sver naq fbzrbar chg vg bhg
		jvgu na vpr cvpx.
	-- Anovfpb hfrq gurve snpr gb zbqry sbe navzny pbbxvrf.
	-- jura gurl lryyrq "Encr", gur thl fpernzrq "Ab jnl!"
	-- gurl jrer gur ovegu pbageby cbfgre puvyq.
	-- jura gurl jrer obea, gur qbpgbe fynccrq gurve zbgure.
	-- nf n puvyq, gurve cneragf gvrq n cbex pubc nebhaq ure arpx gb
		trg gur chccl gb cynl jvgu gurz.
	-- gurl unir gb farnx hc ba n tynff bs jngre, whfg gb trg n qevax!
%
