N pregnva onegraqre qrpvqrq gb gel gb trg n srj arj phfgbzref vagb uvf one
ol fgnegvat n tvzzvpx vaibyivat n ubefr.  Uvf pynvz jnf gung vs nalbar pbhyq
trg gur ubefr gb ynhtu, ur jbhyq tvir gurz qevaxf ba gur ubhfr.  Gur vqrn
jbexrq jryy naq ohfvarff vzcebirq hagvy bar avtug n lbhat zna jnyxrq va naq
juvfcrerq va gur ubefr'f rne.  Gur ubefr vzzrqvngryl ohefg vagb ulfgrevpny
ynhtugre naq gur zna jba gur pbagrfg.  Gur arkg avtug gur fnzr guvat
unccrarq: gur zna juvfcrerq va gur ubefr'f rne naq gur ubefr ohefg bhg
ynhtuvat.  Gur arkg avtug, gur onegraqre qrpvqrq gb punatr gur ehyrf.  Abj,
n crefba unq gb trg gur ubefr gb pel va beqre gb jva gur qevaxf ba gur
ubhfr.  Yngre ba gung avtug, gur fnzr thl pnzr va naq fnvq "Pna V gnxr gur
ubefr vagb gur onguebbz sbe n zvahgr?  V cebzvfr V'yy znxr uvz pel."  Gur
onegraqre nterrq naq fher rabhtu, jura gur zna pnzr bhg yrnqvat gur ubefr,
gur ubefr jnf pelvat uvf rlrf bhg.  Gur onegraqre pbhyq gnxr vg ab zber naq
fnvq, "Ubj qvq lbh znxr uvz ynhtu gur bgure gjb avtugf?"
	"V gbyq uvz gung zl qvpx jnf ovttre guna uvf", ercyvrq gur zna.
	"Ubj qvq lbh znxr uvz pel gbavtug?"
	"V cebirq vg."
%
N puvyq pna tb bayl fb sne va yvsr jvgubhg cbggl genvavat.  Vg vf abg
zrer pbvapvqrapr gung fvk bs gur ynfg frira cerfvqragf jrer cbggl
genvarq, abg gb zragvba arneyl unys bs gur angvba'f fgngr yrtvfyngbef.
		-- Qnir Oneel
%
N pbhcyr gbbx gurve lbhat fba sbe uvf svefg ivfvg gb gur pvephf, naq ol
punapr gurve frngf jrer arkg gb gur ryrcunag cra.  Jura uvf sngure yrsg
gb ohl cbcpbea, gur obl cvcrq hc,
	"Zbz, jung'f gung ybat guvat ba gur ryrcunag?"
	"Gung'f gur ryrcunag'f gehax, qrne," fur ercyvrq.
	"Ab, abg gung."
	"Bu, gung'f gur ryrcunag'f gnvy."
	"Ab, Zbz.  Qbja haqrearngu."
	Uvf zbgure oyhfurq naq fnvq, "Bu, gung'f abguvat."
	Cerggl fbba gur sngure erghearq, naq gur zbgure jrag bss gb trg
n fbqn.  Nf fbba nf fur unq yrsg gur obl ercrngrq uvf dhrfgvba.
	"Gung'f gur ryrcunag'f gehax, fba."
	"Qnq, V xabj jung na ryrcunag'f gehax vf.  Gur guvat ng gur
bgure raq."
	"Bu, gung'f gur ryrcunag'f gnvy."
	"Ab.  Qbja gurer."
	Gur sngure gbbx n tbbq ybbx naq rkcynvarq, "Gung'f gur ryrcunag'f
cravf."
	"Qnq, ubj pbzr jura V nfxrq Zbz, fur fnvq vg jnf abguvat?"
	Gur zna gbbx n qrrc oerngu naq ercyvrq, "Fba, V'ir *fcbvyrq*
gung jbzna."
%
N pbjobl, uvf ubefr naq uvf qbt jrer pncgherq ol ubfgvyr Vaqvnaf.
Guvf jnfa'g ernyyl n ceboyrz sbe gur navznyf nf gur Vaqvnaf pna nyjnlf hfr
gurz, ohg gur pbjobl vf vasbezrq gung ur jvyy or ohearq ng gur fgnxr gur
sbyybjvat fhaevfr.  Gung riravat, gur Vaqvna puvrs gryyf gur pbjobl gung
ur pna bar ynfg jvfu, jvguva ernfba, bs pbhefr, orsber zrrgvat uvf sngr
gur sbyybjvat zbeavat.  Gur pbjobl ercyvrf gung nyy ur ernyyl jnagf vf gb
frr uvf snvgushy qbt, Erk, bar ynfg gvzr.  Jura gur qbt vf oebhtug ol gur
Vaqvnaf, gur pbjobl uhtf uvf pbzcnavba naq juvfcref fbzrguvat vagb uvf rne.
Ng bapr gur qbt ehaf bss bire gur uvyy.  Nznmvatyl rabhtu, n srj ubhef yngre,
ur ergheaf, nppbzcnavrq ol fbzr gjb qbmra cebfgvghgrf sebz n arneol gbja.
Arrqyrff gb fnl, gur oenirf ner qryvtugrq naq nf n erjneq bssre gur pbjobl
uvf qbt gb xrrc uvz pbzcnal guebhtu gur erfg bs gur avtug.  Jura gur qbt vf
oebhtug sbegu gur pbjobl ntnva ehaf uvf unaq bire Erk'f urnq naq gura oraqf
qbja gb juvfcre vagb uvf rne: "Guvf znl or zl ynfg punapr, Erk, fb trg vg
evtug guvf gvzr -- tb vagb gbja naq trg gur cbffr!"
%
N svther jvgu pheirf nyjnlf bssref n ybg bs vagrerfgvat natyrf.
%
	N terng Nzrevpna Bylzcvp jerfgyre jnf erprvivat ynfg-zvahgr nqivpr
sebz uvf pbnpu nobhg gur hcpbzvat zngpu jvgu gur Fbivrg Punzcvba.
 	"Guvf Ehffvna thl vf ernyyl tbbq, irel fgebat naq dhvpx.  Ohg V guvax
lbh pna gnxr uvz.  Erzrzore, gubhtu, yvxr V'ir gbyq lbh orsber, qba'g yrg
uvz trg lbh va gur Cergmry ubyq.  Jvgu uvf fgeratgu lbh'q arire trg bhg."
	Gur Nzrevpna yrncf bagb gur zng, naq jvguva zbzragf gur gjb orurzbguf
ner tbvat penml, fgehttyvat gb trg rnpu bgure cvaarq.  Gur Nzrevpna fybjyl
tnvaf tebhaq naq nccrnef gung ur zvtug npghnyyl jva ba cbvagf nybar, jura, va
gur oyvax bs na rlr, gur Ehffvna erirefrf uvz naq juvcf uvz vagb gur sngny
Cergmry ubyq.
	Gur pbnpu, bss ol gur fvqr, funxrf uvf urnq va qvfznl, naq fvgf qbja
ba gur orapu jvgu uvf urnq orgjrra uvf unaqf.  Nyy bs n fhqqra, gurer'f n
fpernz naq gur gjb jerfgyref syl ncneg, gur Nzrevpna ertnvavat pbageby naq
cvaavat gur Ehffvna.  Nsgre gur zngpu, va gur qerffvat ebbz, gur pbnpu
svanyyl trgf gur jvaare nybar.  "Terng wbo!  Ohg ubj gur uryy qvq lbh trg bhg
bs gur Cergmry Ubyq?  V gubhtug vg jnf bire sbe fher!"
 	"Jryy, V qvq gbb.  V jnf va gur ubyq, nobhg gb or cvaarq, jura V fnj
guvf uhtr cnve bs grfgvpyrf unatvat evtug va sebag bs zl rlrf.  V svtherq
jung gur uryy, fb V fgergpurq sbejneq naq ovg gurz nf uneq nf V pbhyq.  Pbnpu,
lbh whfg qba'g xabj lbhe bja fgeratgu 'gvy lbh'ir ovggra lbhe bja onyyf!"
%
	N tebhc bs fbyqvref orvat cercnerq sbe n cenpgvpr ynaqvat ba n gebcvpny
vfynaq jrer jnearq bs gur bar qnatre gur vfynaq uryq, n cbvfbabhf fanxr gung
pbhyq or ernqvyl vqragvsvrq ol vgf nygreangvat benatr naq oynpx onaqf.  Gurl
jrer vafgehpgrq, fubhyq gurl svaq bar bs gurfr fanxrf, gb teno gur gnvy raq bs
gur fanxr jvgu bar unaq naq fyvqr gur bgure unaq hc gur obql bs gur fanxr gb
gur fanxr'f urnq.  Gura, sbeprshyyl, oraq gur guhzo nobir gur fanxr'f urnq
qbjajneq gb oernx gur fanxr'f fcvar.  Nyy jrag jryy sbe gur ynaqvat, gur
punetr hc gur ornpu, naq gur zbir vagb gur whatyr.  Ng bar sbkubyr fvgr, gjb
zra jrer fgnegvat gb qvt naq jbaqrevat jung unq unccrarq gb gurve cnegare.
Fhqqrayl ur fgnttrerq bhg bs gur haqreoehfu, havsbez va fuerqf, pbirerq jvgu
oybbq.  Ur pbyyncfrq gb gur tebhaq.  Uvf ohqqvrf jrer fb fubpxrq gurl pbhyq
bayl oyheg bhg, "Jung unccrarq?"
	"V ena sebz gur ornpuurnq gb gur rqtr bs gur whatyr, naq, nf V uvg gur
tebhaq, V fnj na benatr naq oynpx fgevcrq fanxr evtug va sebag bs zr.  V
tenoorq vgf gnvy raq jvgu zl yrsg unaq.  V cynprq zl evtug unaq nobir zl yrsg
unaq.  V uryq svezyl jvgu zl yrsg unaq naq fyvq zl evtug unaq hc gur obql bs
gur fanxr.  Jura V ernpurq gur urnq bs gur fanxr V syvpxrq zl evtug guhzo qbja
gb oernx gur fanxr'f fcvar... qvq lbh rire tbbfr n gvtre?"
%
N zna vf gnyxvat gb uvf jvsr jura ur zragvbaf gung gurer'f n "Ovt Qvpx"
pbagrfg ng bar bs gur onef va gbja naq gur cevmr sbe gur jvaare vf $1000.
	"Bu, ubarl," fur rkpynvzf, "V qba'g jnag lbh gnxvat gung guvat
bhg va choyvp!"
	"Ohg onol," ur fnlf, "$1000 vf n ybg bs zbarl."
	"V qba'g pner!" fur fnlf, fgnzcvat ure sbbg.  "V qba'g jnag lbh
fubjvat gung guvat gb rirelobql."
	Naq gur fhowrpg vfa'g zragvbarq ntnva, hagvy gur sbyybjvat riravat
jura ur unaqf ure $1000.
	"Qvq lbh ragre gur pbagrfg, rira nsgre V gbyq lbh V qvqa'g jnag
lbh gb?" fur nfxf.
	"Cyrnfr sbetvir zr, ghegyr qbir," ur fnlf.  "V gubhtug jr pbhyq hfr
gur zbarl."
	"Lbh zrna lbh gbbx gung guvat bhg sbe rirelobql gb frr?" fur fnlf,
grnef jryyvat hc va ure rlrf.
	"Bayl rabhtu gb jva, ubarl, bayl rabhtu gb jva."
%
	N zna jnyxf vagb n one jvgu n Yrcerpunha ba uvf fubhyqre.  Ur jnyxf
hc gb gur one naq fvgf qbja, beqrevat n orre sbe uvzfrys naq bar sbe gur
yvggyr Yrcerpunha.
	Nsgre n srj orref, gur Yrcerpunha whzcf qbja bss gur thl'f fubhyqre,
fgehgf qbja gur one naq pbzrf gb n fgbc va sebag bs n engure ynetr pbafgehpgvba
jbexre.  Ybbxvat gur thl evtug va gur rlr, ur tvirf uvz n engure ynetr, qnzc,
Oebak purre.  Naq gebgf onpx gb fvg ba uvf ohqql'f fubhyqre.  Gur jbexre vf
cerggl hcfrg, ohg qrpvqrf gb fuvar ba guvf engure bssrafvir oernpu bs znaaref.
	Nsgre nabgure orre naq n unys gubhtu, gur Yrcerpunha ubcf qbja naq
jnyxf bire gb uvf cerivbhf ivpgvz naq tbrf "CCCCUUUUUUUOOOOGGGGGG" ntnva.
Jryy, gung'f gbb zhpu, naq gur ivpgvz xabpxf gur Yrcerpunha bss gur one naq,
nsgre jnyxvat bire gb fgnaq irel pybfr gb gur Yrcerpunha'f rfpbeg, gryyf uvz
va n engure bireybhq ibvpr, gung vs vg unccraf ntnva, ur'f tbvat gb "phg bss
uvf yvggyr qvpx!"
	Ercyvrf gur rfpbeg, "Yrcerpunhaf qba'g unir qvpxf."
	"Lrnu?  Jryy, gura," nfxf gur ovt zna, ubj qbrf ur gnxr n cvff?"
	"CCCCUUUUUUUOOOOGGGGGG!!!!"
%
N zna jnyxf vagb gur qbpgbe'f bssvpr naq gur qbpgbe fnlf gb uvz, "V'ir tbg
fbzr tbbq arjf naq fbzr onq arjf."
	"Gryy zr gur tbbq arjf svefg" gur cngvrag ercyvrf.
	"Gur tbbq arjf vf gung lbhe cravf vf tbvat gb or nobhg gjb vapurf
ybatre naq nobhg na vapu jvqre," gur qbpgbe fnlf.
	"Gung'f terng!" fnlf uvf cngvrag.  "Jung'f gur onq arjf?"
	"Znyvtanag."
%
N zna jrag gb n qbpgbe gb unir uvf cravf raynetrq.  Jryy, guvf 
cnegvphyne cebprqher vaibyirq fcyvpvat n onol ryrcunag'f gehax bagb gur 
zna'f cravf.  Birewblrq, gur zna jrag bhg jvgu uvf orfg tvey gb n irel 
snapl erfgnhenag.  Nsgre pbpxgnvyf, gur zna'f cravf percg bhg bs uvf cnagf, 
sryg nebhaq gur gnoyr, tenoorq n uneq ebyy naq dhvpxyl qvfnccrnerq haqre 
gur gnoyrpybgu.  Gur tvey jnf fgnegyrq naq rkpynvzrq, "Jung jnf gung?"
	Fhqqrayl gur cravf pnzr onpx, gbbx nabgure uneq ebyy naq whfg nf
dhvpxyl qvfnccrnerq.  Gur tvey jnf fvyrag sbe n zbzrag, gura svanyyl fnvq,
"V qba'g oryvrir V fnj jung V guvax V whfg fnj... pna lbh qb gung ntnva?"
	Jvgu n ovg bs na hapbzsbegnoyr fzvyr gur zna ercyvrq, "Ubarl, V'q
yvxr gb, ohg V qba'g guvax zl nff pna gnxr nabgure uneq ebyy!"
%
N zna jvgu ab nezf jnyxrq vagb n one naq nfxrq sbe n orre.  Gur onegraqre
fubirq gur sbnzvat tynff va sebag bs uvz.
	"Ybbx," fnvq gur phfgbzre, "V unir ab nezf -- jbhyq lbh cyrnfr ubyq
gur tynff sbe zr?
	"Fher," fnvq gur onegraqre.
	"Vs," fnvq gur phfgbzre, "lbh'yy ernpu va zl evtug unaq pbng cbpxrg,
lbh'yy svaq gur zbarl sbe gur orre."
	Gur onegraqre tbg gur zbarl naq enat hc gur ovyy.
	"Lbh'ir orra irel xvaq," fnvq gur phfgbzre. "Whfg bar guvat zber.
Jurer vf gur zra'f ebbz?"
	"Hc gur fgerrg gb gur yvtug," fnvq gur onegraqre, "ghea yrsg, jnyx
gjb oybpxf, naq gurer'f n tnf fgngvba ba gur pbeare."
%
N zna'f sngure vf irel, irel byq, naq gur fba pna'g nssbeq irel tbbq gerngzrag
sbe uvz, fb ur'f va n engure funool, eha-qbja ahefvat ubzr.  Bar qnl gur fba
jvaf n ybggrel -- naq gur svefg guvat ur qbrf vf vafgnyy uvf sngure va gur orfg
byq ntr ubzr gung zbarl pna ohl.
	Ba gur svefg qnl gur byq zna vf fvggvat jngpuvat GI, naq ur fgnegf
gb yrna n yvggyr ovg gb bar fvqr.  Evtug njnl n ahefr ehaf bire naq tragyl
fgenvtugraf gur byq zna.  N yvggyr yngre ur'f rngvat qvaare, naq jura ur
svavfurf, ur ortvaf gb gvc n yvggyr ovg gb bar fvqr.  Nabgure ahefr ehaf
bire naq tragyl chfurf uvz hcevtug ntnva.
	Gur fba ivfvgf uvf sngure yngre gung riravat naq nfxf uvz ubj ur'f
orvat gerngrq.
	"Vg'f n jbaqreshy cynpr, fba," ercyvrf gur sngure.  "V ernyyl yvxr
vg urer, tbhezrg sbbq, pbybe GI'f va rirel ebbz, gur freivpr vf haoryvrinoyr,
gurer'f whfg bar yvggyr ceboyrz."
	"Jung'f gung, Qnq?"
	"Gurl jba'g yrg lbh sneg."
%
N zbhfr jnf favssvat nebhaq va n zrnqbj, jura na rntyr fjbbcrq qbja,
fjnyybjrq uvz jubyr, naq ebfr hc va gur nve ntnva.  Gur zbhfr jbexrq
uvf jnl guebhtu hagvy uvf urnq jnf fgvpxvat bhg bs gur oveq'f nffubyr.
	"Fnl, tbbq ohqql," ur fdhrnxrq, "ubj uvtu hc ner jr, naljnl?"
	"Bu, nobhg gjb gubhfnaq srrg," nafjrerq gur rntyr.
	Gur zbhfr'f rlrf ohttrq bhg.  "Url, lbh jbhyqa'g fuvg zr, jbhyq lbh?"
%
N cebpgbybtvfg vf n qbpgbe jub chgf va n uneq qnl ng gur bevsvpr.
%
N fba gnxrf uvf Vgnyvna vzzvtenag sngure gb uvf svefg onfronyy tnzr.  Vg
unccraf gung vg'f Byq Gvzre'f Qnl ng Lnaxrr fgnqvhz naq nyy gur onfronyy
terngf ner gurer.  Gur fba rfpbegf uvf sngure gb obk frngf evtug ba gur
guveq onfr yvar naq frngf uvz jvgu orre naq n Lnaxrrf pnc.
	Gur svefg onggre hc vf Zvpxrl Znagyr.  Ba gur frpbaq cvgpu ur
fjvatf gung ong naq PENPX!  Gur onyy evpbpurgf bss gur jnyy sbe n qbhoyr.
Gur pebjq tbrf penml naq gur sngure fgnaqf hc naq lryyf, "Ehaan Zvpxrl!
Ehaan Zvpxrl!"
	Gur arkg onggre hc vf Wbr QvZnttvb.  Gur cvgpure, cvgpuvat uvz
pnershyyl, jbexf uvz gb n 3-2 pbhag naq whfg zvffrf gur bhgfvqr pbeare.
	"Onyy sbhe!" lryyf gur hzcver naq Wbr gbffrf uvf ong nfvqr naq ortvaf
gb jnyx gb svefg onfr.
	Gur sngure lryyf bhg, "Ehaan Wbr!  Ehaan Wbr!"
	"Ab, ab, Cbc," pbeerpgf uvf fba.  "Ur tbg sbhe onyyf.  Ur jnyxf."
	Naq gur byq zna pyrapurf uvf svfg naq fnlf fbyrzayl, "Jnyxn cebhq
Wbr.  Jnyxn cebhq."
%
N fgngryl-ybbxvat zngeba jnf jnyxvat guebhtu gur Oebak Mbb, fghqlvat gur
navznyf.  Jura fur cnffrq gur cbephcvar rapybfher fur orpxbarq gb n arneol
nggraqnag.
	"Lbhat zna," fur ortna, "qb Abegu Nzrevpna cbephcvarf unir funecre
cevpxf guna gubfr envfrq va Nsevpn?"
	Gur nggraqnag urfvgngrq sbe n zbzrag.  "Jryy, zn'nz," ur nafjrerq,
"gur Nsevpna cbephcvar'f dhvyyf ner funecre... ohg V guvax gurve cevpxf ner 
nobhg gur fnzr."
%
N geniryvat pvephf jnf cresbezvat va n fznyy gbja, nebhaq gur ghea bs gur
praghel, jura znal bs gur pvephf navznyf jrer fgvyy pbafvqrerq gb or irel
ener naq rkbgvp.  Bar avtug bar bs gur ryrcunagf rfpncrq.  Vg jnf uhatel
naq sbhaq n tneqra va n yvggyr byq ynql'f onpxlneq.  Gur jbzna, jub unq
arire orsber frra na ryrcunag, jnf ulfgrevpny naq pnyyrq gur cbyvpr.

Yvggyr Byq Ynql:  "Gurer'f n *uhtr* zbafgre va zl tneqra!
Cbyvpr:	"Pnyz qbja, zn'nz, rirelguvat jvyy or nyy evtug.  Abj rknpgyl jung
	qbrf vg ybbx yvxr?"
YBY:	"Vg'f n qnex pbybe naq vg'f gerzraqbhf!  Vg'f chyyvat hc zl
	irtrgnoyrf jvgu vgf gnvy!"
Cbyvpr:	"Jvgu vgf gnvy?  Gura jung'f vg qbvat?"
YBY:	"Lbh jbhyqa'g oryvrir zr vs V gbyq lbh!"
%
	N juvgr zna jnf geniryvat jvgu Vaqvna (Nzrevpna) bhg Jrfg.  Gur
Vaqvna fgbcf, chgf uvf rne gb gur tebhaq, naq fnlf, "Ohssnyb pbzr."
	Gur juvgr zna ybbxf nebhaq va nyy qverpgvbaf, frrf abguvat sbe
zvyrf naq nfxf gur Vaqvna ubj gur uryy ur xabjf gung.
	Ercyvrf gur Vaqvna, "Rne jrg."
		-- Yvyl Gbzyva, "Gur Frnepu sbe Fvtaf bs Vagryyvtrag
		   Yvsr va gur Havirefr"
%
N jbzna unq n sbyybjhc ivfvg jvgu ure qbpgbe nsgre uvf cerfpevovat snveyl uvtu
qbfntrf bs grfgbfgrebar (n znyr ubezbar) sbe ure.  Fur jnf n yvggyr jbeevrq
nobhg fbzr bs gur fvqr rssrpgf fur jnf rkcrevrapvat.
	"Qbpgbe Xrlrf, gur ubezbarf lbh'ir orra tvivat zr unir urycrq n ybg
jvgu zl zrabcnhfny flzcgbzf, ohg V'z ernyyl nsenvq gung lbh'er tvivat zr gbb
zhpu.  V'ir fgnegrq tebjvat unve va cynprf gung V'ir arire tebja unve orsber!"
	Gur qbpgbe ernffherq ure. "N yvggyr unve tebjgu vf n cresrpgyl abezny
fvqr rssrpg bs grfgbfgrebar.  Whfg jurer unf guvf unve nccrnerq?"
	"Ba zl onyyf."
%
N lbhat obl vf gbyq ol uvf chevgnavpny sngure guna ur fubhyq arire unir
frk jvgu n jbzna, orpnhfr n jbzna unf grrgu va ure intvan naq jvyy ovgr
bss uvf cravf.
	Gur lrnef tb ol, naq gur obl svanyyl zneevrf.  Nsgre n engure
havafcvevat ubarlzbba uvf jvsr svanyyl pbasebagf uvz naq qrznaqf gung ur
gryy ure jul ur jba'g znxr ybir gb ure.
	"Jryy, ubarl," ur ercyvrf.  "Lbh unir... grrgu... qbja gurer."
	"Jung!?" fur ercyvrf haoryvrivatyl.  "Ab V qba'g!  Ubarfg, qneyvat,
pbzr urer naq ybbx sbe lbhefrys."
	Gur zna engure urfvgnagyl rknzvarf ure irel gubebhtuyl.
	"Gurer!" uvf jvsr fnlf gevhzcunagyl.  "Abj qb lbh oryvrir zr?"
	"Lrf," ercyvrq ure uhfonaq.  "Naq lbhe thzf ner va *greevoyr*
pbaqvgvba."
%
N lbhat ynql sevraq bs zvar whfg fjnyybjrq n enmbe oynqr...
Fur cresbezrq n gbafvyyrpgbzl, na nccraqrpgbzl, n ulfgrerpgbzl,
guerr pvephzpvfvbaf, naq phg bss gur svatre bs n pnfhny sevraq.
%
Nqbcgvat gur zrgevp flfgrz jbhyq unir pregnva cflpubybtvpny nqinagntrf --
fhpu nf orvat noyr gb pynvz 18 pragvzrgref vafgrnq bs frira vapurf.
%
Nyy wbof fubhyq or bcra gb rirelobql, hayrff gurl npghnyyl erdhver n
cravf be n intvan.
		-- Sybelapr Xraarql

Gurer ner ernyyl abg znal wbof gung npghnyyl erdhver n cravf
be n intvan, naq nyy bgure bpphcngvbaf fubhyq or bcra gb rirelbar.
		-- Tybevn Fgrvarz
%
Na byq znvq jnagrq gb geniry ol ohf gb gur crg przrgrel jvgu gur
erznvaf bs ure png.  Nf fur obneqrq gur ohf, fur juvfcrerq gb gur
qevire, "V unir n qrnq chffl."

Gur qevire cbvagrq gb gur jbzna va gur frng oruvaq uvz naq fnvq, "Fvg
jvgu zl jvsr.  Lbh gjb unir n ybg va pbzzba."
%
Naq abj, gur Ovat Pebfol fubj, oebhtug gb lbh ol gur znxref bs Rk-Ynk.
... n oevrs cnhfr, naq gura Ovat!
%
Nalguvat zber guna guerr funxrf vf sbe sha.
%
Ohvyq n orggre zbhfrgenc, gur fnlvat tbrf -- naq jvgu gur oenffvrer, Lnaxrr 
Vatrahvgl qvq rknpgyl gung.  Ohg gurve gehr fgebxr bs travhf jnf gur arj onvg.
Gur byq snfuvbarq zbhfrgenc jnf ybnqrq jvgu purrfr; abobql pnerf zhpu nobhg 
purrfr, rkprcg zvpr.  Ohg jura Nzrevpna xabj-ubj erybnqrq gur oenffvrer jvgu 
gvgf, rirel urgrebfrkhny znyr va gur pbhagel jnf ubcryrffyl genccrq.
		-- Nyna Furezna, "Gur Encr bs gur N*C*R*"
%
Pncgnva Ubbx qvrq bs wbpx vgpu.
%
"Pnershyyl fghql gurfr gjb raynetrq cubgbtencuf ba qvfcynl, Ze. Enssregl,"
gur nggbearl sbe n cbyvgvpvna fhvat n arjfcncre sbe yvory vafgehpgrq uvf
pyvrag ba gur jvgarff fgnaq, "naq vaqvpngr juvpu vf lbhe nff naq juvpu vf
n ubyr va gur tebhaq."
%
Pevgb, V bjr n pbpx gb Nfpyrcvhf; jvyy lbh erzrzore gb cnl gur qrog?
		-- Fbpengrf' ynfg jbeqf
%
Qrfcrengr nobhg gur fgngr bs ure fbpvny yvsr, n lbhat jbzna erfbegrq
gb gur Crefbany Nqf va gur onpx bs ure ybpny cncre.  Va gur nq fur znqr vg
dhvgr pyrne gung jung fur jnf nqiregvfvat sbe jnf na rkcreg ybire; fur nyernql
unq cyragl bs frafvgvir sevraqf naq zrnavatshy eryngvbafuvcf naq jung fur
abj jnagrq jnf gb trg ynvq, gb chg vg oyhagyl.  Cubar pnyyf fgnegrq pbzvat
va, jvgu rnpu pnyyre grfgvslvat gb uvf frkhny cebjrff, ohg abar dhvgr fgehpx 
gur lbhat jbzna'f snapl.  Hagvy bar avtug ure qbbeoryy enat.  Bcravat gur qbbe 
fur sbhaq n zna jvgu ab nezf be yrtf, jub vasbezrq ure gung ur jnf gurer va 
erfcbafr gb ure nqiregvfrzrag.  "V'z greevoyl fbeel," fur fgnzzrerq, "ohg zl 
nq jnf dhvgr rkcyvpvg.  V'z ernyyl ybbxvat sbe fbzrguvat bs n frkhny rkcreg, 
naq lbh... hu... qba'g unir nyy gur..."

"Yvfgra," gur zna vagreehcgrq ure, "V enat gur qbbeoryy, qvqa'g V?"
%
Qvrg Zbhagnva Qrj unf gur fnzr cU naq qrafvgl bs hevar.
		-- Arjfjrrx, 31 Whyl, 1989
%
Qhr gb n zvkhc va hebybtl, benatr whvpr jvyy abg or freirq guvf zbeavat.
%
Rng cehar lbtheg sbe gung "trg hc naq tb" srryvat.
%
	Rire gubhtug bs chggvat n sreerg qbja lbhe cnagf?  Lrf, sreergf,
gubfr jrnfry-yvxr navznyf bevtvanyyl genvarq gb uhag engf naq cbffrffvat
arrqyr funec pynjf naq enmbe funec grrgu.  Gur Ratyvfu qb vg sbe fcbeg.
	Sreerg Yrttvat vaibyirf gur glvat bs n pbzcrgvgbef'f gebhfref ng
gur naxyrf naq gura qebccvat vagb gur gebhfref n pbhcyr bs ivpvbhf sreergf.
Ab wbpxfgencf be haqrejrne nyybjrq -- abguvat ohg gur obqvrf' bja.  Gur
sreergf zhfg or lbhat naq va tbbq pbaqvgvba.  Arvgure gur sreerg be gur
pbagrfgnag znl or qehttrq be qehax -- pbyq rlrq fbore bayl.  Gur gebhfref
fubhyq or ybbfr svggvat, gb nyybj gur sreerg gb fpenzoyr sebz bar yrt gb
gur bgure, naq ner genqvgvbanyyl juvgr, fb gung gur oybbq fubjf orggre.
	Abezny pbagrfgnagf ner noyr gb xrrc gurz qbja sbe hc gb 40 frpbaqf.
Gur punzcvba sreerg yrttre, Ert Zryybe, bs Lbexfuver, ubyqf gur jbeyq erpbeq
bs 5 ubhef naq 26 zvahgrf.  Ze. Zryybe'f pynvzf gung orvat gur punzcvba vf
abg fb zhpu urebvfz ohg, "Lbh whfg tbg gb or noyr gb unir lbhe gbby ovggra
naq abg pner."
%
Sng qvegl snegf pnzr fcyhggrevat bhg bs lbhe onpxfvqr.  Lbh unq na nefr shyy
bs snegf gung avtug, qneyvat, naq V shpxrq gurz bhg bs lbh, ovt sng sryybjf,
ybat jvaql barf, dhvpx yvggyr zreel penpxf...
		-- Wnzrf Wblpr
%
Sbhe zra unq orra cynlvat tbys gbtrgure sbe gjragl lrnef.  Nsgre gurve hfhny
Fngheqnl tnzr bar jrrx, bar bs gur zra wbvarq gur bgure guerr sbe n cbfg-tnzr
fubjre sbe gur svefg gvzr.  Uvf sevraqf jrer fhecevfrq - "Sbe gjragl lrnef",
bar bs gurz fnlf, "lbh unira'g fubjrerq nsgre bhe tnzr, lbh'ir whfg jnvgrq sbe
hf va gur pyhoubhfr.  Jul gur fhqqra punatr?"
	"Jryy", ercyvrf gurve sevraq, "V jnf obea jvgu n snveyl hahfhny
zrqvpny pbaqvgvba.  V unq obgu n cravf naq n intvan.  Ynfg zbagu V svanyyl
qrpvqrq gb unir gur intvan erzbirq."
	Gur bgure guerr zra ybbx ng uvz va qvforyvrs naq qvfthfg.  "Lbh
zrna," fancf bar bs gurz, "lbh pbhyq unir cynlrq sebz gur jbzra'f grr nyy
gurfr lrnef?"
%
Sebz gur bhgfrg, gur oyvaq qngr jnf n svnfpb naq vg jnf vagrafvsvrq ol gur
snpg gung gur sryybj jnf gbb vafrafvgvir naq rtb-evqqra gb ernyvmr vg.  Gur
zbzrag bs gehgu pnzr va gur fhccre pyho nf ur pyhgpurq gur tvey'f guvtu naq
juvfcrerq,
	"Onol, ubj'f nobhg bhe phggvat bhg gb zl cnq fb V pna fyvc lbh avar
vapurf?"
Gurer jnf n zbzrag bs fvyrapr, naq gura gur tvey fnvq,
	"Lbh xabj, V ernyyl qba'g guvax lbh pbhyq trg vg hc guerr gvzrf
va n ebj!"
%
Tbbq qnl sbe jngre fcbegf.  Gnxr n ongu jvgu n sevraq.
%
Tebjahcf ner eryhpgnag gb gnxr fpvrapr svpgvba frevbhfyl, naq jvgu tbbq
ernfba: fpv-sv vf n ubezbany npgvivgl, abg n yvgrenel bar.  Vgf genqvgvbany
pbapreaf ner nyy chorfprag.  Frpbaqnel frkhny punenpgrevfgvpf ner rireljurer,
qvfthvfrq.  Nyvraf unir gragnpyrf.  Gryrcngul nyybjf lbh gb unir frk jvgubhg
nal anfgl vapbairavrapr bs gbhpuvat.  Jbzoyvxr fcnprfuvcf cebivqr onynaprq
zrnyf.  Ab bar rire unf gb tebj byq -- obql cnegf ner ercynprnoyr, yvxr
Wbo'f qnhtugref, naq vs lbh'er yhpxl lbh pna orpbzr n ebobg.  Nf sbe gur
nqhyg jbeyq, vg'f fvzcyl abg gurer; cbyvgvpny flfgrzf graq gb or anviryl
nhgubevgnevna (gurer ner zber ybeqf va fpvrapr svpgvba guna ba choyvp
gryrivfvba) naq ner bsgra ehyrq ol lbhat oblf ba dhrfgf.  Gur zbfg cbchyne
fpv-sv obbx va lrnef, Senax Ureoreg'f Qhar, fbyq zvyyvbaf bs pbcvrf ol
pbzovavat nyy gurfr gurzrf: vg raqf jvgu vgf nqbyrfprag ureb pbadhrevat gur
havirefr juvyr fgenqqyvat n tvnag jbez.
		-- Neabyq Xyrva
%
Unys gur cbfgf gb guvf tebhc ner nobhg znfgheongvba naq gur bgure unys
ner nobhg cravf fvmr.  Naq jung V jnag gb xabj vf, vs nyy lbh'er qbvat
vf wrexvat bss, jul qb lbh pner ubj ovt vg vf?
		-- Sebz nyg.frk
%
Unyg!!  Jub tbrf gurer, sevraq be rarzn?
%
Uneel pnzr vagb jbex ba Zbaqnl srryvat nofbyhgryl svar, naq fb jnf nfgbavfurq
jura uvf frpergnel hetrq uvz gb yvr qbja ba gur fbsn; rira zber fb jura uvf
obff gbbx bar ybbx ng uvz naq beqrerq uvz gb gnxr gur qnl, vs abg gur jrrx,
bss.  Rira uvf cbxre ohqqvrf jbhyqa'g unir nalguvat gb qb jvgu uvz, vafvfgvat
gung ur tb fgenvtug gb orq.  Svanyyl, gverq bs erfvfgvat rirelbar'f nqivpr,
ur jrag gb frr uvf qbpgbe, jub gbbx bar ybbx ng uvz naq ehfurq bire jvgu
n fgergpure.
	"Ohg qbpgbe," ur cebgrfgrq, "V srry svar."
Jryy, guvf jnf n chmmyre, pbaprqrq gur qbpgbe, jub cebprrqrq gb ersre gb gur
rabezbhf ersrerapr gbzrf oruvaq uvf qrfx, zhggrevat gb uvzfrys.
	"Ybbxf tbbq, srryf tbbq...  Ab, lbh ybbx yvxr uryy.  Ybbxf tbbq,
srryf greevoyr...  Anu, lbh srry svar, evtug?"
Guhzovat shevbhfyl guebhtu nabgure ibyhzr, ur fnvq,
	"Ybbxf greevoyr, srryf greevoyr...  Abcr, gung jba'g qb vg rvgure."
Svanyyl, "Ybbxf greevoyr, srryf greevsvp... Nun!!  Lbh'er n intvan!"
%
Ur pneevrq zr bire gur fgernz, fgevqvat guebhtu gur pheerag, uvf fgebat,
zhfphyne, guvtuf fpnepryl urfvgngvat nf ur fher-sbbgrqyl sbeqrq gur jngre.
Ohg jung jnf gung ohytr, fznyy, boybat, fbyvq, gung zvtug unir orra, fnl,
n cbpxrg pnzren?
		-- Na Rkpvgvat Wbhearl
%
Ur jub snegf va puhepu zhfg fvg va uvf bja crj.
%
Ure svther qrfpevorq n frg bs cnenobynf gung pbhyq pnhfr pneqvnp neerfg
va n lnx.
		-- Jbbql Nyyra
%
UBJ GB ERZBIR FGNVAF -- #28
	Frzra fgnvaf pna or erzbirq sebz pbzchgre grezvanyf jvgu
	Snagnfgvx be gur yvxr.  Hfr Jvaqrk ba gur tynff ubjrire, naq
	or fher gb ghea gur cbjre bss vs lbh unir gb pyrna orgjrra
	gur xrlf.
%
V pna'g oryvrir gung bhg bs 100,000 fcrez, lbh jrer gur dhvpxrfg.
		-- Fgrira Crney
%
V pubxrq Yvaqn Ybirynpr.
%
V pbagvahrq jrggvat zl orq sbe n ybat gvzr, abg whfg bhg bs pbagenevarff,
ohg gb unir gur cyrnfher bs srryvat zl jnez hevar ehaavat qbja zl yrtf
naq jnyybjvat va vgf bqbe.
		-- Fnyinqbe Qnyv
%
	V qba'g jnag gb fnl gung fur unq ovt gvgf, ohg bar qnl V nfxrq ure
whfg ubj ovt gurl jnf, naq fur fnvq, "7 naq 7/8".
	V fnvq, "7 naq 7/8?!  Jung qvq lbh zrnfher 'rz jvgu?"
	Naq fur ercyvrq, "N Fgrgfba."
%
V xabj jung lbh'er hc gb, lbh juvgr-srngurerq svraq!
Tb eryrnfr lbhe objryf ba fbzr yrffre crefbantr!
		-- J.P. Svryqf, hcba frrvat n oveq bireurnq
%
"V arrq n pnzry gung pna tb jvgubhg jngre sbe ng yrnfg guerr jrrxf,"
gur Nzrevpna fnvq gb na Nytrevna pnzry zrepunag.  "Vf vg cbffvoyr?"
	"Nyy guvatf ner cbffvoyr," ercyvrq gur zrepunag.  Ur cebprrqrq gb
gnxr n pnzry bhg bs uvf onea naq yrnq uvz gb n gnax bs jngre.  Nsgre gur
pnzry unq qehax vgf svyy naq jnf nobhg gb yvsg vgf urnq bhg bs gur gnax,
gur zrepunag cvpxrq hc gjb arneol oevpxf, bar va rnpu unaq, fgrccrq oruvaq
gur pnzry, naq fznpxrq uvf grfgvpyrf jvgu gur oevpxf.
	Gur pnzry yrg bhg n tvtnagvp "Juubbbbfu!" naq fhpxrq hc jung frrzrq
yvxr gjragl zber tnyybaf bs jngre.
	Gur Nzrevpna fgnerq vaperqhybhfyl ng gur pnzry zrepunag.  "Zl Tbq,
zna!" ur rkpynvzrq, "qbrfa'g gung uheg?!"
	Gur zrepunag fuehttrq.  "Bayl vs lbh trg lbhe guhzof va orgjrra gur
oevpxf."
%
V gryy ln, V xarj zl zbeavat jnfa'g tbvat evtug.   Jura V chg ba zl fuveg
gur ohggba sryy bss, jura V cvpxrq hc zl oevrspnfr, gur unaqyr sryy bss,
V gryy ln, V jnf nsenvq gb tb gb gur onguebbz.
		-- Ebqarl Qnatresvryq
%
V jnyxrq ba gbjneq Cybhtujevtug, guvaxvat nobhg srprf.  Jung n ybg jr unq
sbhaq bhg nobhg gur ceruvfgbevp cnfg sebz gur fghql bs sbffvyvmrq qhat bs
ybat-inavfurq navznyf.  N zvenphybhf guvat, ernyyl; n erpbirel sebz gur
cnfg sebz jung jnf pneryrffyl erwrpgrq.  Naq va gur Zvqqyr Ntrf, ubj
pbaprearq crbcyr jub yvirq pybfr gb gur jbeyq bs angher jrer jvgu gur
srprf bs navznyf.  Naq jung n inevrgl bs anzrf gurl unq sbe gurz: gur
Pebgryf bs n Uner, gur Sevnagf bs n Obne, gur Fcenvagf bs na Bggre, gur
Jreqrebor bs n Onqtre, gur Jnttlvat bs n Sbk, gur Shzrgf bs n Qrre.
Fheryl gurer zvtug or fbzr jbeqf sbe gur zngrevny fb arne gb gur urneg bs
Bml Sebngf [na npnqrzvp fghqlvat srprf] guna fuvg? Jung nobhg gur
Ceboyrzf bs n Cerfvqrag, gur Onpxjneq Cnffrf bs n Sbbgonyyre, gur
Qrsreenyf bs n Qrna, gur Bqq Ibyhzrf bs n Yvoenevna, gur Sbbgabgrf bs n
Cu.Q., gur Ybj Tenqrf bs n Serfuzna, gur Nakvrgvrf bs na Hagraherq Cebsrffbe?
		-- Eboregfba Qnivrf, "Gur Erory Natryf"
%
V jnf n pbpx-grnfre ng Ebbfgre Enzn.  
V hfrq gb raentr gur onagnzf orsber gur ovt obhgf.
		-- Sverfvta Gurnger
%
V jnf gbvyrg-genvarq ng thacbvag.
		-- Ovyyl Oenire
%
V jvyy abg or oevrsrq be qroevrsrq, zl haqrejrne vf zl bja.
%
V'z abg ynhtuvat oruvaq lbhe onpx; rirelguvat shaal vf va sebag!
		-- Ebqarl Qnatresvryq'f jvsr
%
Va Senapr gurl cvff ba Znva Fgerrg.  (Va cvffbvef, Znzn, abg purnc qvfcynl).
		-- Wbav Zvgpuryy
%
Va bhgre fcnpr, abobql pna urne lbh sneg.
%
Vg vf erpbhagrq gung ng Xvat'f Pbyyrtr va gur Fgenaq nebhaq gur gvzr bs gur
jne, gur Puvrs bs Freivprf jbhyq varivgnoyl ortva gur lrne'f ebhaqf ol
grnpuvat "n fvathyneyl vzcbegnag cevapvcyr bs zrqvpvar."  Ur nfxrq n ahefr
gb srgpu uvz n fnzcyr bs hevar.  Ur gura gnyxrq ng yratgu nobhg Qvnorgrf
zryyvghf. "Qvnorgrf," ur fnvq, "vf n terrx anzr; ohg gur Ebznaf abgvprq gung
gur orrf yvxr gur hevar bs qvnorgvpf, fb gurl nqqrq gur jbeq zryyvghf juvpu
zrnaf fjrrg nf ubarl.  Jryy, nf lbh xabj, lbh znl svaq fhtne va gur hevar
bs n qvnorgvp ..."
	Ol abj gur ahefr unq erghearq jvgu n fnzcyr bs hevar juvpu gur
ertvfgene cebzcgyl uryq hc yvxr n gebcul.  Jr fgnerq ng gung fgenj-pbyberq
syhvq nf vs jr unq arire frra fhpu n guvat orsber.  Gur ertvfgene gura
fgnegyrq hf.  Ur qvccrq n svatre obyqyl vagb gur hevar, gura yvpxrq uvf
svatre jvgu gur gvc bs uvf gbathr.  Nf vs gnfgvat jvar, ur bcrarq naq pybfrq
uvf yvcf encvqyl.  Pbhyq ur creuncf qrgrpg n snvag gnfgr bs fhtne?  Gur fnzcyr
jnf cnffrq ba gb hf sbe na bcvavba.  Jr nyy qvccrq n svatre vagb gur syhvq,
nyy bs hf sbbyvfuyl yvpxrq gung svatre.
	"Abj," fnvq gur Ertvfgene tevaavat, "Lbh unir yrneag gur svefg
cevapvcyr bs qvntabfvf.  V zrna gur cbjre bs bofreingvba."  Jr jrer onssyrq.
Jr fgbbq arne gur fyhvpr ebbz bhgfvqr gur jneq, naq va gur qvfgnapr, fbzr
nabalzbhf cngvrag jnf rkcybfviryl pbhtuvat. "Lbh frr," gur ertvfgene fnvq
pbagvahvat gevhzcunagyl, "V qvccrq zl ZVQQYR svatre vagb gur hevar, ohg
yvpxrq zl VAQRK svatre -- abg yvxr nyy lbh puncf.
%
Vg gnxrf yrngure onyyf gb cynl ehtol.
	(Oybbq znxrf gur tenff tebj!)
%
Vg jnf ng gur rvtugu naahny zbhfr pbairagvba naq zvpr sebz arne naq sne unq
tngurerq sbe gur onyy.  N cerggl yvggyr srznyr zbhfr jnygmrq ol gur fgnt
yvar naq bar bs gur znyrf juvfgyrq n ybj, qvegl juvfgyr gb uvzfrys.
Gheavat gb  nabgure zbhfr ur fnvq, "Ybbx ng gur yrtf ba gung ovgpu, nera'g
gurl ornhgvshy?"
	"Whfg snve," jnf gur nafjre.
	"Lbh'er penml," fnvq gur svefg zbhfr naq gura gheavat gb nabgure,
nfxrq uvf bcvavba.
	"Gurl'er avpr," fnvq gur guveq zbhfr, "ohg abguvat gb trg rkpvgrq
nobhg."
	"Fbzr zvpr unir ab nccerpvngvba," rkpynvzrq gur svefg zbhfr.  "Abj
lbh," ur fnvq gb n sbhegu zbhfr, "jung qvq lbh guvax?"
	"Gb gryy lbh gur gehgu," jnf gur ercyl, "V'z ab nhgubevgl ba yrtf;
V'z n gvg zbhfr zlfrys."
%
Wbna, gur engure jryy-cebcbegvbarq frpergnel, fcrag nyzbfg nyy bs
ure inpngvba fhaonguvat ba gur ebbs bs ure ubgry.  Fur jber n onguvat fhvg
gur sevfg qnl, ohg ba gur frpbaq, fur qrpvqrq gung ab bar pbhyq frr ure
jnl hc gurer, naq fur fyvccrq bhg bs vg sbe na birenyy gna.  Fur'q uneqyl
ortha jura fur urneq fbzrbar ehaavat hc gur fgnvef; fur jnf ylvat ba ure
fgbznpu, fb fur whfg chyyrq n gbjry bire ure erne.
	"Rkphfr zr, zvff," fnvq gur syhfgrerq yvggyr nffvfgnag znantre bs
gur ubgry, bhg bs oerngu sebz ehaavat hc gur fgnvef.  "Gur Uvygba qbrfa'g
zvaq lbhe fhaonguvat ba gur ebbs, ohg jr jbhyq irel zhpu nccerpvngr lbhe
jrnevat n onguvat fhvg nf lbh qvq lrfgreqnl."
	"Jung qvssrerapr qbrf vg znxr," Wbna nfxrq engure pnyzyl.  "Ab bar
pna frr zr hc urer, naq orfvqrf, V'z pbirerq jvgu n gbjry."
	"Abg rknpgyl," fnvq gur rzoneenffrq yvggyr zna.  "Lbh'er ylvat ba
gur qvavat ebbz fxlyvtug."
%
Xbaenq Yberam, gur terng navzny orunivbevfg, jnf fpehchybhf nobhg phygvingvat
sehvgshy pbashfvba.  Yberam yvirq nzbat uvf erfrnepu fhowrpgf:  qbmraf bs
fcrpvrf bs znzznyf, oveqf, ercgvyrf, naq svfurf.  Ur qvq abg dhnagvsl, pbageby,
be pbafpvbhfyl rkcrevzrag.  Ur tbg gb xabj rnpu perngher vaqvivqhnyyl, gura
guerj gurz gbtrgure, jngpuvat sbe gur harkcrpgrq, gur hahfhny, be gur ovmneer
va gur punbf gung sbyybjrq.  Sbe rknzcyr, uvf vagrerfg va bar bs rgubybtl'f
zbfg vzcbegnag pbaprcgf, gung bs vagragvba zbirzragf (zbgvbaf jvgu zrnavat,
fhpu nf gur urnq oboovat va oveqf gung freirf nf na nynez fvtany orsber
syvtug), qrevirq sebz na vanqiregrag rkcrevzrag.  Ur unq genvarq n serr-sylvat
enira gb rng enj zrng sebz uvf unaq naq unq orra srrqvat gur oveq sbe frireny
ubhef bar qnl.  Ur jbhyq ernpu vagb uvf cnagf cbpxrg naq gnxr bhg n cvrpr bs
zrng, naq gur enira jbhyq fjbbc qbja gb teno vg va vgf ovyy.  Ol naq ol, Yberam
jrag gb eryvrir uvzfrys arne n urqtr.  Jura gur enira fnj uvz chg uvf unaq
vagb uvf cnagf naq chyy bhg nabgure zbefry bs zrng, vg fjbbcrq qbja, uhatevyl
tenfcvat gur arj zbhgushy va vgf ovyy.  Yberam ubjyrq va cnva.  Ohg gur rirag
yrsg n qrrc vzcerffvba ba uvz -- nobhg ubj snvgushyyl navznyf erfcbaq gb
vagragvba zbirzragf, gung vf.
		-- Gur Fpvraprf, Znl/Whar, 1988, A.L. Npnqrzl bs Fpvrapr.
%
Ynqvrf, urer'f n uvag: Vs lbh'er cynlvat ntnvafg n sevraq jub unf ovt
obbof, oevat ure gb gur arg naq znxr ure uvg onpxunaq ibyyrlf.  Gung'f
gur uneqrfg fubg sbe gur jryy raqbjrq.  "V'ir tbg gb uvg bire gurz be
haqre gurz, ohg V pna'g uvg guebhtu," Naavr Wbarf hfrq gb nyjnlf zbna
gb zr.  Abg univat zhpu va zl oen, V sbhaq vg uneq gb flzcnguvmr jvgu ure.
		-- Ovyyvr Wrna Xvat
%
Ynql gb Tbys Ceb: "V jnf fghat ol orrf ba lbhe tbys pbhefr!"
Ceb:	"Hzzz, jryy, jurer?"
Ynql:	"Orgjrra gur 1fg naq 2aq ubyrf."
Ceb:	"Gung'f tbvat gb erny gbhtu gb gerng."
%
... yvxr, jung qb gurl zrna jura gurl fnl 'srzvavar cebgrpgvba'?  Jung'f gung?
N punegerhfr synzrguebjre?
		-- Bchf
%
Zna va fgnyy:
	Url, ohqql?  Vf gurer nal gbvyrg cncre bhg gurer?
Zna ng fvax:
	Ab, V qba'g frr nal.  Whfg n frpbaq...  Abcr, abar va
	nal bs gur bgure fgnyyf rvgure.
N zvahgr cnffrf.
Zna va fgnyy:
	Fnl, ohqql?
Zna ng fvax:
	Lrnu?
Zna va fgnyy:
	Lbh tbg punatr sbe n gra?
%
Zna jub qnapr va pebjqrq onyyebbz qnapr purrx gb purrx jvgu jbzna oruvaq uvz.
%
Zna jub xrrc zbarl va wbpxfgenc unf svanapvny znggref nyy onyyrq hc.
%
Znal n onpurybe srryf gur arrq gb vafreg uvf znfphyvavgl.
%
Znl Nyynu oybj fnaq va lbhe Cercnengvba U.
%
Znl gur snvel tbq-pnzry yrnir n yhzc ba lbhe cvyybj!
%
Znlor vs gur thl jub qrirybcrq Gjvaxvrf unqa'g unq fhpu n ybj
bcvavba bs uvzfrys gurl jbhyq unir orra na vapu be gjb ybatre!
%
"Zvaq lbh, abg nf onq nf gur avtug Nepuvr Crggvterj ngr fbzr furrc'f grfgvpyrf
sbe n org...  Tbq, gung oybbql furrc xvpxrq uvz!"
		-- Evccvat Lneaf
%
	Ze. Urefu pnzr ubzr gb svaq uvf jvsr fvggvat anxrq va sebag bs gur
zveebe, nqzvevat ure oernfgf.
	"Naq jung qb lbh guvax lbh'er qbvat?" ur nfxrq.
	"V jrag gb gur qbpgbe gbqnl naq ur fnvq V unir gur oernfgf bs n 
gjragl-svir-lrne-byq."
	"Bu lrnu?  Naq jung qvq ur unir gb fnl nobhg lbhe sbegl-lrne-byq nff?"
	"Abguvat," fur ercyvrq. "Lbhe anzr qvqa'g pbzr hc ng nyy."
%
Ze. Erpgvba, Ze. Uhtu T. Erpgvba, cyrnfr cvpx hc n juvgr pbhegrfl gryrcubar!
%
Zl zbgure qvqa'g oernfg-srrq zr.  Fur fnvq fur yvxrq zr nf n sevraq.
		-- Ebqarl Qnatresvryq
%
Zl jvsr unf oernfg pnapre.  Fur gbyq zr gb fgneg qngvat.
		-- Ubjneq Fgrea
%
Anxrq puvyqera ner fb cresrpgyl cher naq ybiryl.  V pbasrff V qb abg nqzver
anxrq oblf.  Gurl nyjnlf frrz gb zr gb arrq pybgurf -- jurernf bar uneqyl
frrf jul gur ybiryl sbezf bs tveyf fubhyq rire or pbirerq hc.
		-- Yrjvf Pneebyy
%
Anxrq pbhcyr va orq, jbzna fnlf gb zna:
	"Jura V fnvq V unq n sbbg srgvfu, V jnf ersreevat gb pbpxf."
%
Bu, ln qbrfa'g unir gn pnyy zr 'Wbuafba'!  Jryy, lbh pna pnyy zr 'Enl', be
lbh pna pnyy zr 'Wnl', be lbh pna pnyy zr 'E.W.', be lbh pna pnyy zr 'Enl
W.', be lbh pna pnyy zr 'E.W.W.', be lbh pna pnyy zr 'Enl W. Wbuafba', be
lbh pna pnyy zr 'E.W. Wbuafba', ohg ln QBRFA'G unir gb pnyy zr 'Wbuafba'...
%
Bapr va n zrqvriny gvzrf...gurer jnf n Xvat jub jnf trggvat fbeg bs
oberq nsgre qvaare bar avtug.  Ur qrpvqrq gb ubyq n pbagrfg bs jub ng gur
pbheg unq gur zvtugvrfg "jrncba".  Gur svefg xavtug fgbbq hc naq cebpynvzrq
gung ur unq gur zvtugvrfg jrncba... ur chyyrq qbja uvf cnagf naq gvrq n 5
cbhaq jrvtug nebhaq vg.  Gur jrncba qbgu ebfr.  Gur pebjqf purrerq... gur
jbzra fjbbarq... gur puvyqera jnirq zhygv-pbyberq onaaref... naq gur onaq
cynlrq nccebcevngr zhfvp.
	Nabgure xavtug fgbbq hc naq pynvzrq gung ur unq gur zvtugvrfg jrncba.
Ur qebccrq uvf cnagf naq gvrq n 10 cbhaq jrvtug gb uvzfrys.  Gur jrncba qbgu
ebfr. Gur pebjqf purrerq... gur jbzra fjbbarq... gur puvyqera jnirq
zhygv-pbyberq onaaref...  naq gur onaq cynlrq nccebcevngr zhfvp.
	Nsgre frireny zber xavtugf gevrq gb cebir gurve fhcrevbevgl...  gur
Xvat svanyyl fcbxr bhg. "V unir gur zvtugvrfg jrncba bs gurz nyy!" Ur qebccrq
uvf cnagf naq gvrq, abg n 10 cbhaq, abg n 20 cbhaq, abg rire n guvegl cbhaq,
ohg n 40 cbhaq jrvtug, cyhf n pbssr cbg, gb uvzfrys. Gur jrncba qbgu ebfr.
Gur pebjqf purrerq...  gur jbzra fjbbarq... gur puvyqera jnirq zhygv-pbyberq
onaaref... naq gur onaq cynlrq "Tbq Fnir gur Dhrra."
%
Bapr lbh'ir tbg gurz ol gur onyyf, gurve urnegf naq zvaqf jvyy sbyybj.
%
Bar qnl n zbhfr jnf qevivat nybat gur ebnq va uvf Zreprqrf jura ur urneq na
nathvfurq ebnevat abvfr pbzvat sebz gur fvqr bs gur ebnq.  Fgbccvat gur pne,
ur tbg bhg naq qvfpbirerq n yvba fghpx va n qrrc qvgpu naq ebnevat sbe uryc.
Ernffhevat gur yvba, gur zbhfr gvrq n ebcr nebhaq gur nkyr bs gur Zreprqrf,
guerj gur bgure raq qbja gb gur yvba, naq chyyrq gur ornfg bhg bs gur qvgpu.
Gur yvba gunaxrq gur zbhfr cebshfryl naq gurl jrag gurve frcnengr jnlf.
	Gjb zbaguf yngre gur yvba jnf bhg sbe n fgebyy va gur pbhagel jura
ur urneq n cnavpxrq fdhrnxvat pbzvat sebz gur fvqr bs gur ebnq.  Vairfgvtngvat
gur abvfr, jung fubhyq ur pbzr npebff ohg gur zbhfr fghpx va gur fnzr ubyr.
"Bu, cyrnfr uryc zr, Ze. Yvba," fdhrnxrq gur greevsvrq zbhfr.  "V fnirq lbh
jvgu zl pne bapr, erzrzore?"
	"Pbhefr V'yy uryc lbh, yvggyr sryybj," ebnerq gur yvba.  "V'yy whfg
ybjre zl qvpx qbja gb lbh, lbh ubyq ba gb vg, naq jr'yy unir lbh bhg bs gurer
va n wvssl."  Fher rabhtu, n srj zvahgrf yngre gur zbhfr jnf uvtu naq qel ba
gur ebnqfvqr, gelvat gb pbairl uvf rgreany tengvghqr gb gur yvba.
	"Qba'g tvir vg nabgure gubhtug," fnvq gur yvba xvaqyl.  "Vg whfg tbrf
gb fubj gung vs lbh'ir tbg n ovt qvpx, lbh qba'g arrq n Zreprqrf."
%
Bar qnl, va n one, n lbhat zna jnyxf va jvgu n yvggyr qjnes nobhg bar sbbg
gnyy ba uvf fubhyqre naq beqref n orre.  Gur onegraqre freirf gur zna n orre;
gb uvf nfgbavfuzrag, gur yvggyr thl jnyxf qbja gur zna'f nez, gnxrf n fjnyybj
bs gur oerj naq fcvgf vg va uvf snpr.  Nsgre n srj zvahgrf gur phfgbzre
beqref nabgure orre naq gur rknpg fnzr guvat unccraf.  Jryy, ol guvf gvzr,
gur onegraqre vf trggvat cerggl hcfrg; ur svtherf gung gur zna fubhyq gnxr
pner bs gur qjnes.  Fb ur nfxf gur thl, "Jul ner lbh yrggvat gung thl qevax
nyy lbhe orre naq fcvg vg va zl snpr?"
	"Jryy, fve, jura V jnf ba n pbagenpg va Fnhqv Nenovn V zrg guvf travr
naq ur tenagrq zr guerr jvfurf.  V nfxrq sbe n zvyyvba qbyynef, gur zbfg
ornhgvshy jbzna va gur jbeyq, naq n gjryir-vapu cevpx.
%
Bar jub qbrf abg xabj n oheeb sebz n oheebj qbrf abg xabj uvf nff sebz n
ubyr va gur tebhaq!
%
Bcvavbaf ner yvxr nffubyrf -- rirelbar'f tbg bar, ohg abobql jnagf gb ybbx
ng gur bgure thl'f.
		-- Uny Uvpxzna
%
						CYNLTVEY, Vap.
						Cuvynqrycuvn, Cn.  19369

Qrne Fve:
	Lbhe anzr unf orra fhozvggrq gb hf jvgu lbhe cubgb.  V erterg gb
vasbez lbh gung jr jvyy or hanoyr gb hfr lbhe obql va bhe pragresbyq.  Ba
n fpnyr bs bar gb gra, lbhe obql jnf engrq n zvahf gjb ol n cnary bs jbzra
enatvat va ntr sebz 60 gb 75 lrnef.  Jr gevrq gb nffrzoyr n cnary va gur
ntr oenpxrg bs 25 gb 35 lrnef, ohg jr pbhyq abg trg gurz gb fgbc ynhtuvat
ybat rabhtu gb ernpu n qrpvfvba.  Fubhyq gur gnfgr bs gur Nzrevpna jbzna
rire punatr fb qenfgvpnyyl gung obqvrf fhpu nf lbhef jbhyq or nccebcevngr
va bhe zntnmvar, lbh jvyy or abgvsvrq ol guvf bssvpr.  Cyrnfr, qba'g pnyy
hf.
	Flzcngurgvpnyyl,
	Nznaqn Y. Fzvgu

c.f.	Jr nyfb jnag gb pbzzraq lbh sbe lbhe hahfhny cbfr.  Jrer lbh
	jbhaqrq va gur jne, be qb lbh evqr lbhe ovxr n ybg?
%
Cevbe gb guvf lrne'f Ebpx & Ebyy Unyy bs Snzr prezbal, [Pnfu] jrag gb
gur onguebbz.  "V jnf fgnaqvat ng gur hevany, naq Xrvgu Evpuneqf jnyxrq
va...  Ur fnvq, 'Ybbx ng guvf, V'z cvffvat jvgu Wbuaal Pnfu. Jr arrq n
cvpgher bs guvf.'  V fnvq, 'Ab, Xrvgu, jr *qba'g* arrq n cvpgher bs guvf.'"
		-- Ebyyvat Fgbar vagreivrj jvgu Wbuaal Pnfu.
%
Endhry Jrypu:		36-24-36
Ob Qrerx:		35-24-36
Naa-Znetnerg:		37-25-36
Orggr Zvqqyre:		37-25-36
Znevyla Zbaebr:		37-24-37
Wnar Ehffryy:		39-27-38
Wnlar Znafsvryq:	40-23-37
Fbcuvn Ybera:		37-25-36
%
Ehtol vf n tnzr cynlrq ol zra jvgu crphyvneyl funcrq onyyf.
%
Frrzf yvxr guvf qhpx jnqqyrf vagb n cuneznpl, jnqqyrf hc gb gur cerfpevcgvba
pbhagre naq evatf gur oryy.  Gur cuneznpvfg jnyxf hc naq nfxf, "Pna V uryc
lbh?".
	Gur qhpx ercyvrf, "Lrf, V'q yvxr n obk bs pbaqbzf, cyrnfr."
	"Pregnvayl", fnlf gur cuneznpvfg, "jvyy gung or pnfu be jbhyq
lbh yvxr zr gb chg vg ba lbhe ovyy?"
	Faneyf gur qhpx, "Whfg jung xvaq bs qhpx qb lbh guvax V nz?"
%
Frrzf guvf sryybj jnf fhssrevat sebz greevsvp urnqnpurf, naq jrag gb uvf
qbpgbe nobhg vg. Gur culfvpvna znqr n ahzore bs grfgf, naq vasbezrq gur zna
gung gur bayl guvat sbe uvf urnqnpurf jnf pnfgengvba.  Nsgre n srj zber
zbaguf, gur urnqnpurf orpnzr fb vagrafr gung gur zna nterrq gb gur bcrengvba.
Anghenyyl rabhtu, gur ehvangvba bs uvf frk yvsr qrcerffrq uvz gerzraqbhfyl,
naq ur qrpvqrq gb chepunfr n arj jneqebor gb znxr uvzfrys srry orggre.
Ur ragref n zra'f pybguvat fgber naq n fnyrfzna jnaqref bire, ybbxf uvz
hc naq qbja, naq fnlf, "Jryy, yrg'f fgneg jvgu fuvegf... 15 arpx, 34 fyrrir."
	Gur thl vf nznmrq.  "Ubj'q lbh xabj?"
	"Jryy, V'ir orra urer arneyl 30 lrnef, naq V pna gryy fvmrf jvguva
n dhnegre vapu ba rirel cvrpr bs pybguvat."  Gur fnyrfzna'f pynvz vf obear
bhg.  Fynpxf, 34 jnvfg, 32 vafrnz; wnpxrg: 42 ybat.  Naq fb ba naq fb sbegu.
Jura gur zna unf orra pbzcyrgryl bhgsvggrq ur qrpvqrf gung ur'q orggre ohl
fbzr arj haqrejrne.
	Gur fnyrfzna ybbxf ng uvz naq fnlf, "Bxnl, gung'yy or n 34."
	"Ab, gung'f jebat," fnlf gur zna.  "V'ir nyjnlf jbea n 32."  Gur
fnyrfzna vafvfgf, cbvagvat bhg uvf npphenpl fb sne.  Gur zna nethrf, nterrvat
gung juvyr ur'f orra evtug fb sne, ur unf nyjnlf jbea n 32 va fubegf.
	Svanyyl va rknfcrengvba, gur fnyrfzna fnlf, "Yvfgra, V gryy lbh,
lbh *unir* gb jrne n 34.  Bgurejvfr, lbh'yy trg gurfr *njshy* urnqnpurf."
%
Fubeg zna jub qnapr jvgu gnyy jbzna trgf ohfg va zbhgu.
%
	Fubegyl nsgre neevivat ng gurve ubarlzbba qrfgvangvba, gur
fgvyy-areibhf tebbz orpnzr jbeevrq nobhg gur fgngr bs uvf oevqr'f vaabprapr.
Qrpvqvat ba n qverpg pbasebagngvba, ur dhvpxyl haqerffrq, cbvagrq ng uvf
rkcbfrq znaubbq naq nfxrq uvf zngr, "Qb lbh xabj jung guvf vf?"
	Jvgubhg urfvgngvba, fur oyhfuvatyl nafjrerq, "Gung'f n jrr-jrr."
	Qryvtugrq ng gur vqrn bs vafgehpgvat uvf anvir jvsr va gur jnlf bs
ybir, gur uhfonaq juvfcrerq, "Sebz abj ba, qrnerfg, guvf jvyy or pnyyrq n
cevpx."
	"Bu, pbzr abj," gur tvey puvqrq.  "V'ir frra ybgf bs cevpxf naq V
nffher lbh, gung'f n jrr-jrr."
%
Fve Senapvf Qenxr pvephzpvfrq gur jbeyq jvgu n 100 sbbg pyvccre.
%
Fvmr pbhagf.
%
Favss favss...  Url!  Jub snegrq?
%
Fabj Juvgr:
	"Trr thlf, V'ir nyjnlf qernzrq bs trggvat gra vapurf...
	ohg abg na vapu-naq-n-unys ng n gvzr!
%
... Fb guvf vf n irel pbashfvat fvghngvba, naq jung znxrf vg rira
jbefr vf, bhe fgnaqneqf xrrc punatvat.  Gnxr Cynlobl zntnmvar.  Onpx va gur
1950f, jura V fgnegrq ernqvat vg fgevpgyl sbe gur negvpyrf, Cynlobl jnf
pbafvqrerq whfg nobhg gur enpvrfg guvat nebhaq, rira gubhtu nyy vg rire
fubjrq jnf jbzra'f oernfgf.  Tenagrq, nal tvira bar bs gurfr oernfgf jbhyq
unir cebivqrq nqrdhngr furygre sbe n snzvyl bs sbhe, ohg gur birenyy rssrpg
jnf ab zber rkcyvpvg guna znal choyvpngvbaf jr guvax abguvat bs gbqnl, fhpu
nf Fcbegf Vyyhfgengrq'f Naahny Avccyrf Cbxvat Guebhtu Fjvzfhvgf Vffhr.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Cbeabtencul"
%
Fbzrgvzrf thlf'yy fnl gb lbh, "Unir n tbbq bar."  V fnl, "V nyernql unir
n tbbq bar.  Abj V'z ybbxvat sbe n ybatre bar."
		-- Trbetr Pneyva
%
Fhpprff vf yvxr n sneg -- bayl lbhe bja fzryyf avpr.
		-- Wnzrf C. Ubtna
%
Gur qvssrerapr orgjrra guvf fpubby naq n pnpghf cynag vf gung gur
pnpghf unf gur cevpxf ba gur bhgfvqr.
%
	Gur arj cngeba jnf nznmrq ol gur pyrnayvarff bs gur erfgnhenag.  N
jnvgre nccebnpurq gur gnoyr.  "Tbbq nsgreabba, fve.  Jung znl V freir lbh?"
	"V'yy unir gur fgrnx qvaare," gur zna nafjrerq.
	Nf gur jnvgre urnqrq sbe gur xvgpura, gur qvare abgvprq gung ur
jber n fcbgyrff juvgr nceba naq pyrna juvgr tybirf.  Fbba gur jnvgre
erghearq, ornevat n pnffrebyr qvfu ba n pneg juvpu ur hapbirerq gb erirny
gjb grzcgvat svyrg zvtabaf.  Sebz n pbirerq cbpxrg va uvf nceba ur cebqhprq
n fznyy cnve bs fuvavat fvyire gbatf naq jvgu gurz ur genafsreerq gur zrng
sebz gur fgrnzvat pnffrebyr gb gur qvare'f cyngr.  "Jr arire gbhpu nalguvat
jvgu bhe unaqf," ur rkcynvarq.
	Gur jnvgre pbagvahrq freivat.  "Pbasvqragvnyyl," ur fnvq, "jr rira
unir n fcrpvny frg bs ehyrf nobhg ivfvgvat gur yningbel.  Qb lbh frr guvf
yvggyr cvrpr bs fgevat nggnpurq gb zl nceba?"
	"Lrf," gur qvare ercyvrq.  "V abgvprq gung nyy gur ncebaf unq bar."
	Gur jnvgre chg n ynetr oebjarq cbgngb ba gur cyngr jvgu uvf gbatf.
"Jryy," ur ortna, "vs V fubhyq unir gb tb gb gur onguebbz, gung fgevat
pbzrf va irel unaqvyl.  V fvzcyl hamvc zl cnagf naq gnxr vg bhg jvgu gung
cvrpr bs fgevat.  Gung jnl rirelguvat fgnlf fnavgnel."
	"Ohg ubj qb lbh chg vg onpx?"
	"Jryy, V qba'g xabj nobhg gur bgure thlf," gur jnvgre pbasvqrq, "ohg
V hfr gur gbatf."
%
Gur bayl jnl sbe jevgref gb zrrg vf gb funer n dhvpx crr bire n pbzzba ynzccbfg.
		-- Plevy Pbaabyyl, "Wbheany naq Zrzbve"
%
Gur erny gebhoyr jvgu jbzra vf gung gurl unir *nyy* gur chffl.
%
Gur jbeq "fcvar" vf, bs pbhefr, na nantenz bs "cravf".  Guvf vf gehr va
nyzbfg svsgl creprag bs gur ynathntrf bs gur Tnynkl, naq znal crbcyr
unir nggrzcgrq gb rkcynva jul.  Hfhnyyl gurfr rkcynangvbaf trg obttrq
qbja va fvyyl chaf nobhg "fgnaqvat rerpg".
		-- Qbhtynf Nqnzf, "Gur Uvgpuuvxre'f Thvqr gb gur Tnynkl"
%
	Gur lbhat znyr enpr ubefr pnzr sebz n ybat yvar bs jvaaref, naq qvq
jbaqreshyyl va gvzr gevnyf.  Ubjrire, va npghny enprf ur cebirq n yvggyr gbb
ebznagvp, naq pbhyq arire dhvgr oevat uvzfrys gb cnff n zner.
	Fb bar qnl gur genvare jrag gb uvz naq gbyq uvz ur'q unir gb or
pnfgengrq.  Gur lbhat ubefr, xabjvat gung vg jnf rvgure guvf be gur tyhr
snpgbel, gbbx vg cuvybfbcuvpnyyl.  Nsgre nyy, univat gur bcrengvba jnf
nyzbfg n pregnva thnenagrr bs n ybat naq vyyhfgevbhf enpvat pnerre.
	Nsgre n fubeg erpbirel crevbq, gur ubefr jnf ntnva eha va gvzr
gevnyf, naq sbhaq gb qb nf jryy nf rire.  Ohg gur svefg gvzr ur npghnyyl
ena va n enpr, ur bayl jrag nobhg gra cnprf, orsber trggvat n qrwrpgrq ybbx
ba uvf snpr, gheavat nebhaq, naq nzoyvat onpx gb gur fgnegvat tngrf.
	"Jung'f gur znggre?" nfxrq gur genvare, "lbh jrer qbvat terng!"
	"Lrnu, jryy ubj jbhyq lbh srry" ercyvrq gur ubefr, "vs svir gubhfnaq
crbcyr gbbx bar ybbx ng lbh naq fubhgrq `gurl'er bss!'?"
%
Gur lbhat zna-nobhg-gbja rawblrq yhkhel ohg qvqa'g nyjnlf unir gur zrnaf
gb ohl vg, naq fb ur uhssvyl jnyxrq bhg bs gur Zvnzv Ornpu ubgry jura ur 
sbhaq bhg gur punetrf sbe ebbz, zrnyf naq tbys cevivyrtrf jrer $300 n qnl.
Ur ertvfgrerq npebff gur fgerrg ng na rdhnyyl ryrtnag ubgry, jurer gur 
engrf jrer bayl $70.  Gur sbyybjvat zbeavat ur jrag qbja gb gur ubgry'f
tbys pbhefr naq nfxrq Fpbggl, gur ceb, gb fryy uvz n pbhcyr bs tbys onyyf.
"Fher," fnvq Fpbggl.  "Gung'yy or $25 ncvrpr."
	"Jung?" fpernzrq gur onpurybe.  "Va gur ubgry npebff gur fgerrg
gurl bayl punetr $1 n onyy!"
	"Anghenyyl," ercyvrq gur ceb.  "Bire gurer gurl trg lbh ol gur
ebbzf."
%
Gurer jnf bapr n fnyrfzna jub unq na bhgfgnaqvat erpbeq sbe fryyvat gbbgu-
oehfurf.  Uvf obff, jbaqrevat ng uvf hayvxryl fhpprff, frag n zna bhg gb
sbyybj gur fnyrfzna ba ebhaqf gb frr jung cvgpu ur tnir gung oebhtug fhpu
tbbq erfhygf.  Vg jnf fbba sbhaq gung guvf cnegvphyne fnyrfzna jrag gb gur
pbeare bs n ohfl fgerrg naq bcrarq hc uvf oevrspnfr, naq ba bar fvqr jnf gur
nffbegzrag bs gbbguoehfurf, naq ba gur bgure fvqr inevbhf puvcf naq tneavfurf
naq n objy bs oebjavfu fghss.  Ur jbhyq teno n yvxryl phfgbzre naq tvir gurz
gur sbyybjvat cvgpu.
	"Tbbq zbeavat, zn'nz, guvf vf n pbzzrepvny cebzbgvba sbe --- oenaq
bs puvc qvc.  Jbhyq lbh pner gb tvir vg n gel?"
	Ng gung cbvag gur crefba jbhyq gel vg, gura fcvg vg bhg naq fpernz
va hggre qvfthfg, "Guvf gnfgrf yvxr fuvg!"
	Gur fnyrfzna jbhyq fzvyr naq fnl, "Vg vf.  Lbh jnag gb ohl n
gbbguoehfu?"
%
Gurer'f n inf qrsreraf orgjrra zra naq jbzra.
%
	Guvf 600-cbhaq thl qrpvqrf ur pna'g tb ba yvivat guvf jnl, fb ur frrxf
gur uryc bs n pyvavp naq cebprrqf gb tb ba n qenfgvp qvrg.  Vg jbexf: sbhe
zbaguf yngre ur'f qbja gb 160 cbhaqf naq srryvat terng, rkprcg sbe bar ceboyrz.
Ur'f pbirerq jvgu terng sbyqf bs syrfu jurer gur sng hfrq gb or.  Ur pnyyf
hc gur pyvavp, naq gur qbpgbe gryyf uvz abg gb jbeel.  "Gurer'f n fcrpvny
fhetvpny cebprqher gb pbeerpg guvf pbaqvgvba," gur qbpgbe nffherf uvz.  "Whfg
pbzr ba bire gb gur pyvavp."
	"Ohg qbpgbe," gur zna cyrnqf, "lbh qba'g haqrefgnaq.  V'z gbb
rzoneenffrq gb or frra va choyvp yvxr guvf."
	"Qba'g tvir vg nabgure gubhtug," fnlf gur qbpgbe.  "Fvzcyl chyy hc
nyy gur sbyqf nf uvtu nf gurl'yy tb, cvyr gur syrfu ba gbc bs lbhe urnq, chg
ba n gbc ung, naq pbzr ba bire."
	Gur thl sbyybjf gur vafgehpgvbaf naq cebibxrf ab pbzzragf hagvy ur
ernpurf gur pyvavp naq vf fgnaqvat va sebag bs gur nqzvggvat ahefr'f qrfx,
qlvat bs frys-pbafpvbhfarff.  "Gur qbpgbe jvyy or evtug jvgu lbh," fnlf gur
ahefr.  "Fnl, jung'f gung ubyr va gur zvqqyr bs lbhe sberurnq?"
	"Zl aniry," oyhegf bhg gur thl, "ubj q'ln yvxr zl gvr?"
%
Guvf sryybj ehfurq vagb n pebjqrq gnirea ba Fngheqnl avtug.  Zra naq jbzra
fgbbq guerr-qrrc ng gur one.  Bhe zna, jub sryg angher pnyyvat fgebatyl, 
ybbxrq nobhg uvz ohg pbhyqa'g frr nalguvat gung erfrzoyrq n wbua.  Ur fnj n 
fgnvejnl naq obhaqrq hc gur fgrcf gb gur frpbaq sybbe va uvf vapernfvatyl 
qrfcrengr frnepu.  Whfg nf uvf objryf guerngrarq gb rehcg, ur fcbggrq n 
bar-sbbg ol bar-sbbg ubyr va gur sybbe.  Abj, ng gur raq bs uvf pbageby, ur 
qrpvqrq gb gnxr nqinagntr bs gur ubyr.  Ur qebccrq uvf cnagf, uhapurq bire vg, 
naq qvq uvf guvat.  Gubebhtuyl eryvrirq naq erynkrq, ur fnhagrerq qbja gur 
fgrcf gb svaq, gb uvf fhcevfr, gung gur pebjqrq one jnf abj rzcgl.
	"Url!" ur lryyrq gb gur frrzvatyl rzcgl ebbz, "Jurer vf rirelbar?"
	Sebz oruvaq gur one n ibvpr erfcbaqrq, "Url!  Jurer jrer lbh jura
gur fuvg uvg gur sna?"
%
Guvf thl, frr, jnf jnyxva' qbja gur fgerrg fcbegva' gjb -- abg bar, ohg gjb
-- oynpx rlrf; n pbhcyn erny fuvaref.  Ur punaprq hcba uvf ohqql jnyxva' gu'
bgure jnl... gurl fgbccrq gb gnyx...  "Url thl," frm uvf ohqql, "jurer'q'wn
tvg gurz tbbq ybbxva' fuvaref?  Zhfgn orra n uryyhin svtug."
	"Jryy, npghnyyl, V tbg gurz va puhepu," frm ur.
	"Abjjnvgnzvaavg," frm gur sevraq, "abobql tvgf oynpx rlrf va puhepu!"
	"V fjrne V qvq," frm ur, "naq urer'f ubj vg unccrarq.  Jr nyy tbg hc
gb fvat n ulza, lbh frr, naq gur sng ynql va sebag bs zr tbg ure qerff nyy
fghpx hc va gur penpx bs ure ohgg, fb orva' nf ubj V'z n erny traahyzna na'
nyy, jryy, V yrnarq sbejneq naq chyyrq vg bhg sbe ure.  Naq lbh xabj jung?
Fur whfg ghearq nebhaq, unhyrq bss naq fyhttrq zr bar!"
	"Jryy," uvf ohqql ercyvrf, nsgre ur pna gnyx ntnva, "gung fuber 'ahss
rkcynvaf bar bs 'rz.  Ubjqwn tvg gu' bgure bar?"
	"Jryy," frm ur, "yvxr V fnvq, V'z n traahyzna, rira jura fbzrobql qbrf
zr jebat, fb jura V fnj fur qvqa'g yvxr vg yvxr gung, V fghpx vg onpx va."
%
Guvf ubg naq qhfgl pbjobl ebqr va sebz gur zrfn, svygul naq rkunhfgrq.  Ur
boivbhfyl unq unq abguvat ohg uvf ubefr sbe pbzcnal sbe n pbhcyr bs jrrxf
naq jnf ybbxvat sbejneq gb n pbhcyr bs pbyq orref va gur fnybba.  Fjvatvat
bss uvf ubefr naq uvgpuvat vg gb gur envy, gur pbjobl tnir uvf ubefr na
nssrpgvbangr fync ba gur arpx.  Gura ur nfgbavfurq na byq pbjunaq ybhatvat
ba gur cbepu ol zbivat nebhaq gb gur ubefr'f uvaqdhnegref, yvsgvat hc vgf
gnvy naq cynagvat n qrzher xvff ba vgf nffubyr.
	"Jung'q lbh qb gung sbe?" nfxrq gur pbjunaq, pbzcyrgryl erchyfrq.
	"Punccrq yvcf," fnvq gur pbjobl, urnqvat sbe gur fnybba qbbef.
	"Jnvg n zvahgr," fnvq gur byq thl.  "Junqqnln zrna, punccrq yvcf?"
	"Xrrcf ln sebz yvpxva' 'rz," rkcynvarq gur pbjobl.
%
Gbavtug'f cvff vf gbzzbeebj'f Gnat.
		-- Na Nzrevpna nfgebanhg
%
Gjb Crnpr Pbecf qbpgbef jub unq whfg erghearq gb n fgngrfvqr ubfcvgny
jrer va sebag bs gur znva qrfx va gur zvqfg bs n urngrq nethzrag gung
jrag nybat gurfr yvarf:
	(1fg qbpgbe)	"Ab, ab, ab! Vg'f 'jnnnnuzzzo'"
	(2aq qbpgbe)	"Ab lbh'er jebat! Vg'f 'jbbbbbbzzzo'"
naq guvf pbagvahrq sbe dhvgr fbzrgvzr.
	Svanyyl n ahefr fgrccrq va naq fnvq: "Gur pbeerpg cebahapvngvba vf
'jbzo'" naq gebggrq bss.
	(1fg qbpgbe)	"Gung fubjf lbh jung fur xabjf."
	(2aq qbpgbe)	"Lrnu.  V org fur'f arire rira FRRA n uvccbcbgnzhf,
yrg nybar urneq bar sneg haqrejngre."
%
HFRARG vf yvxr n ureq bs cresbezvat ryrcunagf jvgu qvneeurn --
znffvir, qvssvphyg gb erqverpg, njr-vafcvevat, ragregnvavat, naq
n fbhepr bs zvaq-obttyvat nzbhagf bs rkperzrag jura lbh yrnfg
rkcrpg vg.
		-- Trar Fcnssbeq
%
Jryy, Tbq tnir zr n ohfg.  Jung nz V fhccbfrq gb qb jvgu vg?
		-- Znegun Zvgpuryy
%
Jung n zna rawblf zbfg nobhg n jbzna'f pybgurf ner uvf snagnfvrf bs ubj
fur jbhyq ybbx jvgubhg gurz.
		-- Oeraqna Senapvf
%
Juvyr njnl ng n pbairagvba, na rkrphgvir unccrarq gb zrrg n lbhat jbzna jub
jnf cerggl, puvp, naq vagryyvtrag.  Jura ur crefhnqrq ure gb qvfebor va uvf
ubgry ebbz, ur sbhaq bhg fur unq n fhcreo obql nf jryy.  Hasbeghangryl, nf
jvyy unccra, gur rkrphgvir fnqyl sbhaq uvzfrys hanoyr gb cresbez.
	Ba uvf svefg avtug ubzr, gur rkrphgvir cnqqrq anxrq sebz gur fubjre
vagb gur orqebbz gb svaq uvf jvsr fjngurq va n ehzcyrq onguebor, ure unve
pheyrq, ure snpr pernzrq, zhapuvat pnaql ybhqyl nf fur cberq guebhtu n zbivr
zntnmvar.  Naq gura, jvgubhg jneavat, ur sryg gur bafrg bs n zntavsvprag
rerpgvba. 
	Ybbxvat qbja ng uvf gueboovat zrzore, ur faneyrq, "Jul lbh hatengrshy,
zvkrq-hc, fba-bs-n-ovgpu!  Abj V xabj jul gurl pnyy lbh n cevpx!"
%
Jul abg, sbe rknzcyr, bssre n oenaq-arj Zhfgnat pbairegvoyr gb rirel tvey
jub pbafragf gb univat ure Snyybcvna ghorf gvrq va n Tbeqvna xabg?  ... Vg
jbhyq unir gur nqqvgvbany orarsvg bs ryvzvangvat sebz gur trar cbby gubfr
fghcvq rabhtu gb pbafrag gb fhpu n qrny.
		-- Rqjneq Noorl
%
Jbexvat uneq nebhaq urer vf yvxr cvffvat ba lbhefrys va n qnex fhvg;
lbh trg n jnez srryvat ohg abobql abgvprf.
%
Jbhyq lbh engure unir n 5-vapu uneq be na 8-vapu sybccl?
%
Ln xabj, Dhnxre Bngf znxr lbh srry tbbq gjvpr!
%
Lbh ner jvggl, punezvat, unaqfbzr naq nobir nirentr va yratgu.
%
Lbh xabj jung oheaf zl nff?  N synzr nobhg guerr srrg uvtu.
%
Lbh fubhyq or n urzbeeubvq, lbh'er fhpu n cnva va gur nff.
%
