N pnfhny fgebyy guebhtu n yhangvp nflyhz fubjf gung snvgu qbrf abg cebir
nalguvat.
		-- Sevrqevpu Avrgmfpur
%
N Pngubyvp naq n Zrgubqvfg jrer pnecbbyvat gb jbex bar zbeavat, jura n oevpx
sryy bhg bs gur fxl, juvpu fgnegyrq gur qevire naq pnhfrq uvz gb fjreir bss
gur ebnq naq vagb n gryrcubar cbyr, gbgnyvat gur pne.
	Gur gjb fghzoyrq bhg bs gur jerpxntr, obgu srryvat dhvgr sbeghangr
gb or nyvir.  Gur Pngubyvp pebffrq uvzfrys.  Gura gur Cebgrfgnag pebffrq
uvzfrys va na nppraghngrq znaare.
	"Url," fnvq gur Pngubyvp, "V jul qvq lbh pebff lbhefrys, lbh'er abg
Pngubyvp!"
	"Whfg purpxvat," ercyvrq uvf sevraq, pebffvat uvzfrys ntnva,
"fcrpgnpyrf, grfgvpyrf, jnyyrg, cra."
%
N Puevfgvna vf n zna jub srryf ercragnapr ba Fhaqnl sbe jung ur qvq ba
Fngheqnl naq vf tbvat gb qb ba Zbaqnl.
		-- Gubznf Loneen
%
N pyrire cebcurg znxrf fher bs gur rirag svefg.
%
N Tnyvyrb pbhyq ab zber or ryrpgrq cerfvqrag bs gur Havgrq Fgngrf guna
ur pbhyq or ryrpgrq Cbcr bs Ebzr.  Obgu uvtu cbfgf ner erfreirq sbe zra
sniberq ol Tbq jvgu na rkgenbeqvanel travhf sbe fjnguvat gur ovggre
snpgf bs yvsr va onaqntrf bs frys-vyyhfvba.
		-- U. Y. Zrapxra
%
N xrl gb gur haqrefgnaqvat bs nyy eryvtvbaf vf gung n Tbq'f vqrn bs n
tbbq gvzr vf n tnzr bs Fanxrf naq Ynqqref jvgu ternfrq ehatf.
%
	N zna qvrf naq vf trggvat uvf gbhe bs urnira.  Uvf thvqr vf cbvagvat
bhg gur inevbhf srngherf naq ynaqznexf jura gur zna nfxf, "Jung'f gung pyvss?"
	"Bu, lbh qba'g jnag gb ybbx qbja gurer.  Gung'f uryy!"
	Gur zna perrcf hc gb gur rqtr naq ybbxf bire.  Ur frrf yhfu, terra
inyyrlf, ireqnag snezynaq naq gerrf rireljurer.  "Guvf qbrfa'g ybbx fb onq,"
ur fnlf.
	Chmmyrq, gur thvqr pbzrf bire naq ybbxf qbja.  "Qnza!" ur fancf,
"Gubfr Zbezbaf unir orra veevtngvat ntnva!"
%
N zna sryy bss n zbhagnva naq, nf ur sryy, fnj n oenapu naq tenoorq sbe vg.
Ol fhcreuhzna rssbeg ur jnf noyr gb trg n cerpnevbhf tevc ba vg.  Nf ur
jnf unatvat gurer sbe qrne yvsr, ur ybbxrq hc naq pevrq bhg,
	"Vf nalobql gurer?"
N qrrc znwrfgvp ibvpr nafjrerq,
	"Lrf zl fba, V nz urer.  Jung qb lbh arrq?"
	"Uryc zr!!" pevrq gur zna.
	"V jvyy uryc lbh", fnvq gur ibvpr, "Whfg yrg tb bs gur oenapu naq
lbh'yy or fnsr.  Nyy lbh unir gb qb vf gehfg."
Gur zna gubhtug sbe n zbzrag naq pevrq bhg:
	"Nalobql RYFR hc gurer?"
%
N zna jvgubhg n Tbq vf yvxr n svfu jvgubhg n ovplpyr.
%
"N Zbezba vf n zna gung unf gur onq gnfgr naq gur eryvtvba gb qb jung n
tbbq znal bgure crbcyr ner erfgenvarq sebz qbvat ol pbafpvragvbhf
fpehcyrf naq gur cbyvpr."
		-- Ze. Qbbyrl
%
N zlgu vf n eryvtvba va juvpu ab-bar nal ybatre oryvrirf.
		-- Wnzrf Srvoyrzna, "Haqrefgnaqvat Cuvybfbcul"
%
N Chevgna vf fbzrbar jub vf qrnguyl nsenvq gung fbzrbar, fbzrjurer, vf
univat sha.
%
N enoov naq n cevrfg ner fvggvat gbtrgure ba n genva, naq gur enoov yrnaf
bire naq nfxf, "Fb, ubj uvtu pna lbh nqinapr va lbhe betnavmngvba?"
	Gur cevrfg ercyvrf, "Jryy, vs V nz yhpxl, V thrff V pbhyq orpbzr n
Ovfubc."
	"Jryy, pbhyq lbh trg nal uvture guna gung?"
	"V fhccbfr gung vs zl jbexf ner frra va n irel tbbq yvtug gung V
zvtug or znqr na Nepuovfubc."
	"Vf gurer nal jnl gung lbh zvtug tb uvture guna gung?"
	"Vs nyy gur Fnvagf fubhyq fzvyr, V thrff V pbhyq or znqr n Pneqvany."
	"Pbhyq lbh or nalguvat uvture guna n Pneqvany?"
	Urfvgngvat n yvggyr ovg, gur cevrfg fnvq, "V fhcbfr gung V pbhyq
or ryrpgrq Cbcr, ohg bayl vs vg'f Tbq'f jvyy."
	"Naq pbhyq lbh or nalguvat uvture guna gung, vf gurer nal jnl gb tb
hc sebz orvat gur Cbcr?"
	"Jung?!  V fubhyq or gur Zrffvnu uvzfrys?!"
	Gur enoov yrnarq onpx naq fzvyrq.  "Bar bs bhe oblf znqr vg."
%
"Npprcgnapr jvgubhg cebbs vf gur shaqnzragny punenpgrevfgvp bs Jrfgrea
eryvtvba, Erwrpgvba jvgubhg cebbs vf gur shaqnzragny punenpgrevfgvp bs
Jrfgrea fpvrapr."
		-- Tnel Mhxni, "Gur Qnapvat Jh Yv Znfgref"
%
Nyy Tbqf jrer vzzbegny.
		-- Fgnavfynj W. Yrz, "Haxrzcg Gubhtugf"
%
Nyy eryvtvbaf vffhr Ovoyrf ntnvafg Fngna, naq fnl gur zbfg vawhevbhf guvatf
ntnvafg uvz, ohg jr arire urne uvf fvqr.
		-- Znex Gjnva
%
Nyy gur jngref bs gur rnegu ner va gur nezcvg bs gur Terng Sebt.
		-- E. Pehzo
%
Nyernql gur fcvevg bs bhe fpubbyvat vf crezrngrq jvgu gur srryvat gung rirel
fhowrpg, rirel gbcvp, rirel snpg, rirel cebsrffrq gehgu zhfg or fhozvggrq
gb n pregnva choyvpvgl naq vzcnegvnyvgl.  Nyy cebssrerq fnzcyrf bs yrneavat
zhfg tb gb gur fnzr nffnl-ebbz naq or fhowrpgrq gb pbzzba grfgf.  Vg vf gur
rffrapr bs nyy qbtzngvp snvguf gb ubyq gung nal fhpu "fubj-qbja" vf
fnpevyrtvbhf naq creirefr.  Gur punenpgrevfgvp bs eryvtvba, sebz gurve cbvag
bs ivrj, vf gung vg vf vagryyrpghnyyl frperg, abg choyvp; crphyvneyl erirnyrq,
abg trarenyyl xabja; nhgubevgngviryl qrpynerq, abg pbzzhavpngrq naq grfgrq
va beqvanel jnlf...Vg vf cregvarag gb cbvag bhg gung, nf ybat nf eryvtvba
vf pbaprvirq nf vg vf abj ol gur terng znwbevgl bs cebsrffrq eryvtvbavfgf,
gurer vf fbzrguvat frys-pbagenqvpgbel va fcrnxvat bs rqhpngvba va eryvtvba
va gur fnzr frafr va juvpu jr fcrnx bs rqhpngvba va gbcvpf jurer gur zrgubq
bs serr vadhvel unf znqr vgf jnl.  Gur "eryvtvbhf" jbhyq or gur ynfg gb or
jvyyvat gung rvgure gur uvfgbel bs gur pbagrag bs eryvtvba fubhyq or gnhtug
va guvf fcvevg; juvyr gubfr gb jubz gur fpvragvsvp fgnaqcbvag vf abg zreryl
n grpuavpny qrivpr, ohg vf gur rzobqvzrag bs gur vagrtevgl bs zvaq, zhfg
cebgrfg ntnvafg vgf orvat gnhtug va nal bgure fcvevg.
		-- Wbua Qrjrl, "Qrzbpenpl va gur Fpubbyf", 1908
%
Na ngurvfg vf n zna jvgu ab vaivfvoyr zrnaf bs fhccbeg.
%
"Naq Ormry fnvqrgu hagb Funz: `Funz,' ur fnvqrgu, `Gubh funyg tbrfg
hagb gur gbja bs Ortbeenu, naq gurer gubh funyg srgpurgu hagb guvar
obfbz 35 gnyragf, naq nyfb funyg gubh srgpurgu n yvxr ahzore bs phovgf,
cebivqrgu gung gurl ner avpr naq serfu.'"
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Trggvat Eryvtvba"
%
...Naq unir lbh rire abgvprq gung lbh arire frr gur Sngure, gur Fba, naq
gur Ubyl Tubfg cneglvat gbtrgure ng gur fnzr gvzr?  Bu, fher, rirelobql
gnyxf yvxr gurl nera'g gur fnzr crefba, ohg V jbaqre...
%
	Naq Wrfhf fnvq hagb gurz, "Naq jubz qb lbh fnl gung V nz?"
	Gurl ercyvrq, "Lbh ner gur rfpungbybtvpny znavsrfgngvba bs gur tebhaq
bs bhe orvat, gur bagbybtvpny sbhaqngvba bs gur pbagrkg bs bhe irel frysubbq
erirnyrq."
	Naq Wrfhf ercyvrq, "Jung?"
%
...naq ab cuvybfbcul, fnqyl, unf nyy gur nafjref.  Ab znggre ubj nffherq
jr znl or nobhg pregnva nfcrpgf bs bhe oryvrs, gurer ner nyjnlf cnvashy
vapbafvfgrapvrf, rkprcgvbaf, naq pbagenqvpgvbaf.  Guvf vf gehr va eryvtvba
nf vg vf va cbyvgvpf, naq vf frys-rivqrag gb nyy rkprcg snangvpf naq gur
anvir.  Nf sbe gur snangvpf, jubfr ahzore vf yrtvba va bhe bja gvzr, jr
zvtug or nqivfrq gb yrnir gurz gb urnira.  Gurl jvyy abg, hasbeghangryl, qb
hf gur fnzr pbhegrfl.  Gurl nggnpx hf naq rnpu bgure, naq jungrire gurve
cebgrfgngvbaf gb crnprshy vagrag, gur oybbql erpbeq bs uvfgbel znxrf pyrne
gung gurl ner rnfvyl qvfcbfrq gb erfgber gb gur fjbeq.  Zl bja oryvrs va
Tbq, gura, vf whfg gung -- n znggre bs oryvrs, abg xabjyrqtr.  Zl erfcrpg
sbe Wrfhf Puevfg nevfrf sebz gur snpg gung Ur frrzf gb unir orra gur zbfg
iveghbhf vaunovgnag bs Cynarg Rnegu.  Ohg rira jryy-rqhpngrq Puevfgvnaf ner
sehfgngrq va gurve guvefg sbe pregnvagl nobhg gur orybirq svther bs Wrfhf
orpnhfr bs gur haqravnoyr nzovthvgl bs gur fpevcgheny erpbeq.  Fhpu nzovthvgl
vf abg nccnerag gb puvyqera be snangvpf, ohg rirel erpbtavmrq Ovoyr fpubyne
vf cresrpgyl njner bs vg.  Fbzr Puevfgvnaf, nynf, erfbeg gb sbezny ylvat gb
bofpher fhpu ernyvgl.
		-- Fgrir Nyyra
%
	Naq ba gur guveq qnl, Puevfg nebfr, chfurq nfvqr gur ebpx gung unq
freirq nf gur gbzo qbbe, naq jnyxrq ntnva ba gur rnegu.
	Naq nf ur qrcnegrq, n cnffre-ol cbvagrq ng gur qbbe Wrfhf unq yrsg
bcra.  "Jung'f gur znggre jvgu lbh?" ur fnvq. "Obea va n onea?"
%
Naxu vs lbh ybir Vfvf.
%
Nal cevrfg be funzna zhfg or cerfhzrq thvygl hagvy cebirq vaabprag.
		-- Ynmnehf Ybat
%
Nf V nethrq va "Orybirq Fba", n obbx nobhg zl fba Oevna naq gur fhowrpg bs
eryvtvbhf pbzzharf naq phygf, bar erfhyg bs cebcre rneyl vafgehpgvba va gur
zrgubqf bs engvbany gubhtug jvyy or gb znxr fhqqra zvaqyrff pbairefvbaf --
gb nalguvat -- yrff yvxryl.  Oevna abj ernyvmrf guvf naq unf, nsgre ryrira
lrnef, yrsg gur frpg ur jnf nffbpvngrq jvgu.  Gur ceboyrz vf gung bapr gur
hagenvarq zvaq unf znqr n sbezny pbzzvgzrag gb n eryvtvbhf cuvybfbcul --
naq vg qbrf abg znggre jurgure gung cuvybfbcul vf trarenyyl ernfbanoyr naq
uvtu-zvaqrq be hggreyl ovmneer naq veengvbany -- gur cbjref bs ernfba ner
fhcevfvatyl varssrpgvir va punatvat gur oryvrire'f zvaq.
		-- Fgrir Nyyra
%
Nf gur Pngubyvp puhepu orpbzrf zber naq zber gbyrenag, fbzr qnl gurl jvyy
unir gb pbafvqre gur cbffvovyvgl bs n tnl cbcr.  Cbffvoyl gur ynetrfg
vffhr jvyy or univat gb qrpvqr jurgure ur vf "nofbyhgryl qvivar" be "whfg
fvzcyl zneirybhf."
%
Nf gur erprag fvtugvatf bs ohzcre fgvpxref ernqvat "VA PNFR BS ENCGHER, GUVF
IRUVPYR JVYY OR HAZNAARQ" unir perngrq n terng qrny bs pbashfvba, Sbeghar
bssref gur sbyybjvat rkprecgf sebz gur 1989 cevagvat bs gur Fgngr bs Znelynaq
Qevire'f Unaqobbx:
	Vs lbh abgvpr n tybevbhf yvtug va gur fxl, n fbhaq nf bs na vasvavgr
pubve bs harneguyl ibvprf, naq n ubfg bs jvatrq orvatf qrfpraqvat sebz gur
urniraf, qb abg cnavp.  Vs lbh ner ba gur serrjnl, zbir gb gur fubhyqre nf
fbba nf vg vf fnsr gb qb fb, npgvingr lbhe unmneq oyvaxref, naq jnvg sbe gur
raq bs gur jbeyq.  Vs lbh ner Fnirq, vg vf rfcrpvnyyl vzcbegnag gung lbh qb
guvf ORSBER lbh ner pneevrq gb lbhe Rgreany Erjneq, va beqre gung lbhe iruvpyr
abg orpbzr n unmneq gb bguref.  Erzrzore, Encgher vf gur ahzore bar pnhfr bs
nhgbzbovyr nppvqragf qhevat znwbe fcvevghny hcurninyf.  Lbh znl rkcrevrapr n
srryvat bs qvfpbecbengvba ("orvat chyyrq sebz bar'f obql") juvyr qevivat.  Gb
rafher gur fnsrgl bs lbhe cnffratref naq bgure qeviref, zbir gb gur fubhyqre
nf fbba nf lbh abgvpr nal bs gur sbyybjvat flzcgbzf:
	-- Na birejuryzvat frafr bs crnpr naq unccvarff.
	-- Ivfvbaf bs gur snprf bs qrprnfrq snzvyl zrzoref.
	-- N tybevbhf svther va juvgr, orpxbavat sebz gur raq bs n ghaary bs
juvgr zvfg (qb abg pbashfr guvf jvgu genssvp pbageby be znvagnvanapr bssvpref,
jub jrne qnex oyhr naq fnsrgl benatr.)
	Bapr gur srryvat unf cnffrq, vafcrpg lbhe fheebhaqvatf.  Vs fgvyy va
lbhe pne, lbh unir cebonoyl fhssrerq n fgebxr naq fubhyq unir fbzrbar qevir
lbh gb n ubfcvgny ng bapr.  Vs lbh svaq lbhefrys va gur Xvatqbz bs Tbq, pbafhyg
gur ybpny bssvpvnyf sbe vasbezngvba ba ybpny genssvp ehyrf naq erthyngvbaf.
%
Nf gb Wrfhf bs Anmnergu... V guvax gur flfgrz bs Zbenyf naq uvf Eryvtvba,
nf ur yrsg gurz gb hf, gur orfg gur Jbeyq rire fnj be vf yvxryl gb frr;
ohg V ncceruraq vg unf erprvirq inevbhf pbeehcgvat Punatrf, naq V unir,
jvgu zbfg bs gur cerfrag Qvffragref va Ratynaq, fbzr qbhogf nf gb uvf qvivavgl.
		-- Orawnzva Senaxyva
%
Nfurf gb nfurf, qhfg gb qhfg,
Vs Tbq jba'g unir lbh, gur qrivy zhfg.
%
Ngurvfz vf n aba-cebcurg betnavmngvba.
%
Orggre gur cevapr bs fbzr vasrevbe pbheg,
Guna frpbaq, be yrff, va orngvsvp yvtug.
		-- Yhpvsre, Wbbfg ina qra Ibaqry'f "Yhpvsre"
%
Orjner bs zngurzngvpvnaf naq nyy gubfr jub znxr rzcgl cebcurpvrf.  Gur
qnatre nyernql rkvfgf gung gur zngurzngvpvnaf unir znqr pbiranag jvgu
gur qrivy gb qnexra gur fcvevg naq gb pbasvar zna va gur obaqf bs uryy.
		-- Fg. Nhthfgvar
%
Oebgure Wvz'f erprag nccrnenapr ba gur Jvyyvnz naq Znel pnzchf guvf cnfg
jrrx jnf phg fubeg ol na vatravbhf qrivpr qrfvtarq ol gjb pbzchgre fpvrapr
fghqragf.  N guerr-sbbg one bs rkgehqrq nyhzvahz jnf cerpvfryl znpuvarq,
jvgu n ubyr zvyyrq qbja gur pragre bs cerpvfryl gur qvzrafvbaf bs bar bs
gur fznyy Tvqrba ovoyrf.  Gur raq pnccrq bss, n PB2 pnavfgre jnf pbaarpgrq
gb cebivqr hc gb 2,000 CFVT.  Ceryvznel rfgvzngrf qhevat svryq grfgvat
erirnyrq n zhmmyr irybpvgl bs nccebkvzneyl 120-150 ZCU sbe ovoyrf rkvgvat
gur ghor.  Fhssvpvrag nzzhavgvba jnf bognvarq qhevat n cerivbhf ivfvg gb
pnzchf ol nabgure eryvtvbhf betnavmngvba, naq gur flfgrz jnf svefg hfrq ba
Oebgure Wvz, jub fhssrerq n oebxra evo naq ahzrebhf fznyy oehvfrf, va
nqqvgvba gb gur hfhny uhzvyvngvba.
%
Pnzchf pehfnqr sbe Pguhyuh -- vg sbhaq zr.
%
Pngubyvpvfz unf punatrq gerzraqbhfyl va gur erprag lrnef.  Abj jura
Pbzzhavba vf freirq gurer vf nyfb n fnynq one.
		-- Ovyy Znee
%
Puevfg qvrq sbe bhe fvaf, fb yrg'f abg qvfnccbvag Uvz.
%
Puevfgvnavgl naq Whqnvfz nera'g nyy gung qvssrerag, ernyyl.  Tebjvat hc va
n Puevfgvna snzvyl, gur srryvat bs thvyg sbe Zna'f fvaf pbzrf sebz Tbq.
Va n Wrjvfu snzvyl, vg pbzrf sebz lbhe cneragf.
%
Puevfgvnavgl unf abg orra gevrq naq sbhaq jnagvat; vg unf orra sbhaq
qvssvphyg naq abg gevrq.
		-- T. X. Purfgregba
%
Puevfgvnavgl zvtug or n tbbq guvat vs nalbar rire gevrq vg.
		-- Trbetr Oreaneq Funj
%
"Perngvba fpvrapr" unf abg ragrerq gur pheevphyhz sbe n ernfba fb fvzcyr
naq fb onfvp gung jr bsgra sbetrg gb zragvba vg: orpnhfr vg vf snyfr, naq
orpnhfr tbbq grnpuref haqrefgnaq rknpgyl jul vg vf snyfr.  Jung pbhyq or
zber qrfgehpgvir bs gung zbfg sentvyr lrg zbfg cerpvbhf pbzzbqvgl va bhe
ragver vagryyrpghnyl urevgntr -- tbbq grnpuvat -- guna n ovyy sbepvat
ubabenoyr grnpuref gb fhyyl gurve fnperq gehfg ol tenagvat rdhny gerngzrag
gb n qbpgevar abg bayl xabja gb or snyfr, ohg pnyphyngrq gb haqrezvar nal
trareny haqrefgnaqvat bs fpvrapr nf na ragrecevfr?
		-- Fgrcura Wnl Tbhyq, "Gur Fxrcgvpny Vadhvere"
%
Pehpvsvkrf ner frkl orpnhfr gurer'f n anxrq zna ba gurz.
		-- Znqbaan
%
Pguhyuh Pguhpxf!
%
Pguhyuh sbe Cerfvqrag!
	(Vs lbh'er gverq bs pubbfvat gur yrffre bs gjb rivyf.)
%
Pguhyuh Fnirf -- va pnfr Ur'f uhatel yngre.
%
Qnivq jnf whfg n furcureq jub yvxrq gb trg uvf ebpxf bss va yrngure.
%
Qrne Naa Ynaqref:
	Zl uhfonaq jngpurf gur GI cernpuref rirel Fhaqnl.  Ur pynvzf
bar zvavfgre fnvq gurer ner 350 qvssrerag fvaf.  Zl uhfonaq jnagf gb
xabj vs lbh pna trg gur yvfg.  Ur guvaxf ur vf zvffvat fbzrguvat.
		-- R.W. Znlsvryq
%
Qvnargvpf vf n zvyrfgbar sbe zna pbzcnenoyr gb uvf qvfpbirel bs
sver naq fhcrevbe gb uvf vairagvba bs gur jurry naq gur nepu.
		-- Y. Eba Uhooneq
%
Qvq lbh rire jbaqre jung lbh'q fnl gb Tbq vs Ur farrmrq?
%
Qvqwn urne nobhg gur qlfyrkvp qrivy jbefuvccre jub fbyq uvf fbhy gb Fnagn?
%
... qvssrerapr bs bcvavba vf nqinagntvbhf va eryvtvba.  Gur frireny frpgf
cresbez gur bssvpr bs n pbzzba prafbe zbehz bire rnpu bgure.  Vf havsbezvgl
nggnvanoyr?  Zvyyvbaf bs vaabprag zra, jbzra, naq puvyqera, fvapr gur
vagebqhpgvba bs Puevfgvnavgl, unir orra oheag, gbegherq, svarq, vzcevfbarq;
lrg jr unir abg nqinaprq bar vapu gbjneqf havsbezvgl.
		-- Gubznf Wrssrefba, "Abgrf ba Ivetvavn"
%
Qevivat guebhtu n Fjvff pvgl bar qnl, Nyserq Uvgpupbpx fhqqrayl
cbvagrq bhg bs gur pne jvaqbj naq fnvq, "Gung vf gur zbfg sevtugravat
fvtug V unir rire frra."  Uvf pbzcnavba jnf fhecevfrq gb frr abguvat
zber nynezvat guna n cevrfg va pbairefngvba jvgu n yvggyr obl, uvf unaq
ba gur puvyq'f fubhyqre.  "Eha, yvggyr obl," pevrq Uvgpupbpx, yrnavat
bhg bs gur pne.  "Eha sbe lbhe yvsr!"
%
Qhevat nyzbfg svsgrra praghevrf gur yrtny rfgnoyvfuzrag bs Puevfgvnavgl unf
orra hcba gevny.  Jung unf orra vgf sehvgf? Zber be yrff, va nyy cynprf,
cevqr naq vaqbyrapr va gur pyretl; vtabenapr naq freivyvgl va gur ynvgl,;
va obgu, fhcrefgvgvba, ovtbgel, naq crefrphgvba.
		-- Wnzrf Znqvfba
%
Rarzl -- FC (Fhccerffvir Crefba) Beqre.  Snve Tnzr.  Znl or qrcevirq bs
cebcregl be vawherq ol nal zrnaf ol nal Fpvragbybtvfg jvgubhg nal qvfpvcyvar
bs gur Fpvragbybtvfg.  Znl or gevpxrq, fhrq be yvrq gb be qrfgeblrq.
		-- Y. Eba Uhooneq, "Snve Tnzr Qbpgevar"
%
Rer gur pbpx pebjf guevpr bar bs lbh jvyy orgenl zr.
		-- Rneyl Wrjvfu Erfvfgnapr Yrnqre
%
Rirel qnl crbcyr ner fgenlvat njnl sebz gur puhepu naq tbvat onpx gb Tbq.
		-- Yraal Oehpr
%
"Tb gb Urnira sbe gur pyvzngr, Uryy sbe gur pbzcnal."
		-- Znex Gjnva
%
Tb gb gur Fpevcgherf... gur wblshy cebzvfrf vg pbagnvaf jvyy or n onyfnz gb
nyy lbhe gebhoyrf.
		-- Naqerj Wnpxfba

Gur sbhaqngvbaf bs bhe fbpvrgl naq bhe tbireazrag erfg fb zhpu ba gur
grnpuvatf bs gur Ovoyr gung vg jbhyq or qvssvphyg gb fhccbeg gurz vs snvgu
va gurfr grnpuvatf jbhyq prnfr gb or cenpgvpnyyl havirefny va bhe pbhagel.
		-- Pnyiva Pbbyvqtr

Ynfgyl, bhe naprfgbef rfgnoyvfurq gurve flfgrz bs tbireazrag ba zbenyvgl naq
eryvtvbhf fragvzrag.  Zbeny unovgf, gurl oryvrirq, pnaabg fnsryl or gehfgrq
ba nal bgure sbhaqngvba guna eryvtvbhf cevapvcyr, abe nal tbireazrag or
frpher juvpu vf abg fhccbegrq ol zbeny unovgf.
		-- Qnavry Jrofgre
%
Tbq qvq abg perngr gur jbeyq va frira qnlf; ur fperjrq nebhaq sbe fvk
qnlf naq gura chyyrq na nyy-avtugre.
%
Tbq vf n cbylgurvfg.
%
Tbq vf na ngurvfg.
%
TBQ vf nccyvrq CBJRE
    juvpu vf nccyvrq TBIREAZRAG
	juvpu vf nccyvrq CBYVGVPF
	    juvpu vf nccyvrq NQIREGVFVAT
		juvpu vf nccyvrq FBPVBYBTL
		    juvpu vf nccyvrq CFLPUBYBTL
			juvpu vf nccyvrq OVBYBTL
			    juvpu vf nccyvrq PURZVFGEL
				juvpu vf nccyvrq CULFVPF
				    juvpu vf nccyvrq ZNGU
					juvpu vf nccyvrq CUVYBFBCUL
					    juvpu vf nccyvrq OHYYFUVG
%
"Tbq vf nf erny nf V nz," gur byq zna fnvq.  Zl snvgu jnf erfgberq, sbe
V xarj gung Fnagn jbhyq arire yvr.
%
"Tbq vf ovt, fb qba'g shpx jvgu uvz."
%
Tbq vf abg qrnq -- ur'f orra ohfgrq.
%
Tbq vf abg qrnq!  Ur'f nyvir naq nhgbtencuvat ovoyrf ng Pbql'f.
%
Tbq vf abg qrnq.  Ur vf nyvir naq jryy naq jbexvat ba n zhpu yrff
nzovgvbhf cebwrpg.
%
Tbq vf bzavcbgrag, bzavfpvrag, naq bzavoraribyrag -- vg fnlf fb evtug urer
ba gur ynory.  Vs lbh unir n zvaq pncnoyr bs oryvrivat nyy guerr bs gurfr
qvivar nggevohgrf fvzhygnarbhfyl, V unir n jbaqreshy onetnva sbe lbh.  Ab
purpxf, cyrnfr.  Pnfu naq va fznyy ovyyf.
		-- Ynmnehf Ybat
%
Tbq vfa'g qrnq, ur whfg pbhyqa'g svaq n cnexvat cynpr.
%
Tbq vfa'g qrnq, Ur'f whfg gelvat gb nibvq gur qensg.
%
Tbq znqr gur jbeyq va fvk qnlf, naq jnf neerfgrq ba gur friragu.
%
Tbq zhfg ybir nffubyrf -- Fur znqr fb znal bs gurz.
%
Tbq fnvq vg, V oryvrir vg naq gung'f nyy gurer vf gb vg.
%
Tbq ibgrf Erchoyvpna.
%
	Tbq jnagrq gb unir n ubyvqnl, fb Ur nfxrq Fg. Crgre sbe fhttrfgvbaf ba
jurer gb tb.
	"Jul abg tb gb Whcvgre?" nfxrq Fg. Crgre.
	"Ab, gbb zhpu tenivgl, gbb zhpu fgbzcvat nebhaq," fnvq Tbq.
	"Jryy, ubj nobhg Zrephel?"
	"Ab, vg'f gbb ubg gurer."
	"Bxnl," fnvq Fg. Crgre, "Jung nobhg Rnegu?"
	"Ab," fvturq Tbq, "Gurl'er fhpu ubeevoyr tbffvcf.  Jura V jnf
gurer 2000 lrnef ntb, V unq na nssnve jvgu n Wrjvfu jbzna, naq gurl'er
fgvyy gnyxvat nobhg vg."
%
Tbq jnagf hf gb xabj gung vs jr frr n ohzcre fgvpxre fnlvat "Ubax vs lbh ybir
Wrfhf" vg vf n onq vqrn gb ubax gb rkcerff na bcvavba nobhg Wrfhf orpnhfr vg
jvyy naabl gur ghexrl jub chg gur ohzcre fgvpxre ba nf jryy nf rirelbar ryfr
va gur ivpvavgl.  Ubjrire, vg vf whfg svar gb ubax gb naabl gur ghexrl fvzcyl
sbe orvat n ghexrl, sbe Tbq gbyq Zna gb or sehvgshy naq zhygvcyl, naq gb ehyr
bire gur ornfgf bs gur svryq naq gur oveqf bs gur nve, naq gung vapyhqrf gur
ghexrlf jub ohl fhpu ohzcre fgvpxref.  Bs pbhefr, Tbq haqrefgnaqf gung vaabprag
olfgnaqref jvyy nyfb or naablrq, ohg Ur unf jvfryl perngrq genssvp pbcf gb
vzcbfr fbzr pbafgenvag ba ubj zhpu jr znl naabl gur ghexrlf jvguva pvgl yvzvgf,
sbe Tbq'f jvfqbz pbzceruraqf shyy jryy gung gubh funyg abg znxr na bzryrggr
jvgubhg oernxvat rttf.  Tbq bayl jvfurf gurl jrer ghexrl rttf, fb fhpu zbeny
qvyrzznf funyy or srjre va ahzore va gur shgher, jura gur trarengvbaf n-pbzvat
(unyyryhwnu) jba'g unir fb znal ghexrlf gb qrny jvgu.  Ohg Tbq xabjf shyy jryy
gung fhpu guvatf gnxr gvzr, naq gur ghexrlf ner fubjvat zber erfvyvrapr guna
rkcrpgrq, naq znl or jvgu hf sbe n ybat gvzr lrg.
%
Ur unf orra xabja ol znal anzrf;  gur Cevapr bs Yvrf, gur Qverpgbe, Yhpvsre,
Oryvny, naq bapr, ng n cnegl, fbzr boabkvbhf qehax xrcg pnyyvat uvz "Qhqr".
		-- Fgvt'f Vasreab
%
Urnira naq rnegu jrer perngrq nyy gbtrgure va gur fnzr vafgnag, ba Bpgbore
23eq, 4004 O.P. ng avar b'pybpx va gur zbeavat.
		-- Qe. Wbua Yvtugsbbg,
		Ivpr-punapryybe bs Pnzoevqtr Havirefvgl
%
Uvfgbel unf gur eryngvba gb gehgu gung gurbybtl unf gb eryvtvba --
v.r., abar gb fcrnx bs.
		-- Ynmnehf Ybat
%
Ubjrire, ba eryvtvbhf vffhrf gurer pna or yvggyr be ab pbzcebzvfr.  Gurer
vf ab cbfvgvba ba juvpu crbcyr ner fb vzzbinoyr nf gurve eryvtvbhf oryvrsf.
Gurer vf ab zber cbjreshy nyyl bar pna pynvz va n qrongr guna Wrfhf Puevfg,
be Tbq, be Nyynu, be jungrire bar pnyyf guvf fhcerzr orvat.  Ohg yvxr nal
cbjreshy jrncba, gur hfr bs Tbq'f anzr ba bar'f orunys fubhyq or hfrq
fcnevatyl.  Gur eryvtvbhf snpgvbaf gung ner tebjvat guebhtubhg bhe ynaq ner
abg hfvat gurve eryvtvbhf pybhg jvgu jvfqbz.  Gurl ner gelvat gb sbepr
tbireazrag yrnqref vagb sbyybjvat gurve cbfvgvba 100 creprag.  Vs lbh qvfnterr
jvgu gurfr eryvtvbhf tebhcf ba n cnegvphyne zbeny vffhr, gurl pbzcynva, gurl
guerngra lbh jvgu n ybff bs zbarl be ibgrf be obgu.  V'z senaxyl fvpx naq
gverq bs gur cbyvgvpny cernpuref npebff guvf pbhagel gryyvat zr nf n pvgvmra
gung vs V jnag gb or n zbeny crefba, V zhfg oryvrir va "N," "O," "P," naq
"Q."  Whfg jub qb gurl guvax gurl ner?  Naq sebz jurer qb gurl cerfhzr gb
pynvz gur evtug gb qvpgngr gurve zbeny oryvrsf gb zr?  Naq V nz rira zber
natel nf n yrtvfyngbe jub zhfg raqher gur guerngf bs rirel eryvtvbhf tebhc
jub guvaxf vg unf fbzr Tbq-tenagrq evtug gb pbageby zl ibgr ba rirel ebyy
pnyy va gur Frangr.  V nz jneavat gurz gbqnl:  V jvyy svtug gurz rirel fgrc
bs gur jnl vs gurl gel gb qvpgngr gurve zbeny pbaivpgvbaf gb nyy Nzrevpnaf
va gur anzr bs "pbafreingvfz."
		-- Frangbe Oneel Tbyqjngre, Pbaterffvbany Erpbeq
%
V nz na ngurvfg, gunax Tbq!
%
V pnyy Puevfgvnavgl gur bar terng phefr, gur bar rabezbhf naq vaarezbfg
creirefvba, gur bar terng vafgvapg bs eriratr, sbe juvpu ab zrnaf ner
gbb irabzbhf, gbb haqreunaq, gbb haqretebhaq naq gbb crggl -- V pnyy vg
gur bar vzzbegny oyrzvfu bs znaxvaq.
		-- Serqevpu Avrgmfpur
%
V qb abg oryvrir va gur perrq cebsrffrq ol gur Wrjvfu Puhepu, ol gur Ebzna
Puhepu, ol gur Terrx Puhepu, ol gur Ghexvfu Puhepu, ol gur Cebgrfgnag Puhepu,
abe ol nal Puhepu gung V xabj bs.  Zl bja zvaq vf zl bja Puhepu.
		-- Gubznf Cnvar
%
V qb abg srry boyvtrq gb oryvrir gung gur fnzr Tbq jub unf raqbjrq hf jvgu
frafr, ernfba, naq vagryyrpg unf vagraqrq hf gb sbertb gurve hfr.
		-- Tnyvyrb Tnyvyrv
%
V qba'g pner jung fgne lbh'er sbyybjvat, trg gung pnzry bss zl sebag ynja!
		-- Urneq va Orguyrurz
%
V svther gung vs Tbq npghnyyl qbrf rkvfg, Ur'f ovt rabhtu gb haqrefgnaq na
ubarfg qvssrerapr bs bcvavba.
		- Vfnnp Nfvzbi
%
	"V guvax ur fnvq 'Oyrffrq ner gur purrfrznxref.'"
	"Abafrafr, ur jnf boivbhfyl ersreevat gb nyy znahsnpgheref bs qnvel
cebqhpgf."
		-- Gur Yvsr bs Oevna
%
"V'q yvxr gb fgneg n arj eryvtvba.  Bar gung qbrfa'g hfr n qrnq lbhat
zna nf vgf ybtb."
		-- Ovyy Pnva, "Fgnaq Hc Gentrql"
%
V'z n perngvbavfg; V ershfr gb oryvrir gung V pbhyq unir ribyirq sebz zna.
%
V'z na ribyhgvbavfg; V ershfr gb oryvrir gung V pbhyq unir orra perngrq ol zna.
%
Vs ngurvfz vf gb or hfrq gb rkcerff gur fgngr bs zvaq va juvpu Tbq vf
vqragvsvrq jvgu gur haxabjnoyr, naq gurbybtl vf cebabhaprq gb or n
pbyyrpgvba bs zrnavatyrff jbeqf nobhg havagryyvtvoyr puvzrenf, gura V
unir ab qbhog, naq V guvax srj crbcyr qbhog, gung ngurvfgf ner nf
cyragvshy nf oynpxoreevrf.
		-- Yrfyvr Fgrcura
%
Vs Puevfgvnavgl jnf zbenyvgl, Fbpengrf jbhyq or gur Fnivbhe.
		-- Jvyyvnz Oynxr
%
Vs Tbq qvq abg rkvfg, vg jbhyq or arprffnel gb vairag uvz.
		-- Ibygnver, "Rcvgerf, KPIV"
%
"Vs Tbq unq jnagrq hf gb hfr gur zrgevp flfgrz, Wrfhf jbhyq unir unq 10
ncbfgyrf."
%
Vs Tbq yvirq ba Rnegu, crbcyr jbhyq xabpx bhg nyy Uvf jvaqbjf.
		-- Lvqqvfu fnlvat
%
Vs Wrfhf Puevfg pnzr gb guvf gbja, crbcyr jbhyq fnl, terng thl; greevoyr
pnecragre.
		-- Trar Xvexjbbq, ba Ubyyljbbq
%
Vs Wrfhf Puevfg jrer gb pbzr gbqnl, crbcyr jbhyq abg rira pehpvsl uvz.  Gurl
jbhyq nfx uvz gb qvaare, naq urne jung ur unq gb fnl, naq znxr sha bs vg.
		-- Gubznf Pneylyr
%
Vs bar vadhverf jul gur Nzrevpna genqvgvba vf fb fgebat ntnvafg nal pbaarpgvba
bs Fgngr naq Puhepu, jul vg qernqf rira gur ehqvzragf bs eryvtvbhf grnpuvat
va fgngr-znvagnvarq fpubbyf, gur vzzrqvngr naq fhcresvpvny nafjre vf abg
sne gb frrx. ...  Gur pnhfr ynl ynetryl va gur qvirefvgl naq ivgnyvgl bs gur
inevbhf qrabzvangvbaf, rnpu snveyl fher gung, jvgu n snve svryq naq ab snibe,
vg pbhyq znxr vgf bja jnl; naq rnpu navzngrq ol n wrnybhf srne gung, vs nal
pbaarpgvba bs Fgngr naq Puhepu jrer crezvggrq, fbzr eviny qrabzvangvba jbhyq
trg na hasnve nqinagntr.
		-- Wbua Qrjrl, "Qrzbpenpl va gur Fpubbyf", 1908
%
Vs gur puhepu chg va unys gur gvzr ba pbirgbhfarff gung vg qbrf ba yhfg,
guvf jbhyq or n orggre jbeyq.
		-- Tneevfba Xrvyybe, "Ynxr Jbortba Qnlf"
%
Vs gur Ybeq Tbq Nyzvtugl unq pbafhygrq zr orsber rzonexvat hcba gur Perngvba,
V jbhyq unir erpbzzraqrq fbzrguvat fvzcyre.
		-- Nysbafb gur Jvfr, 13gu Praghel Xvat bs Pnfgvyr,
		   Pbzzragvat ba gur Nyzntrfg, ol Cgbyrzl.
%
Vs lbh pna oryvrir gra vzcbffvoyr guvatf orsber oernxsnfg, gura lbh
fubhyq wbva

		GUR PUHEPU BS PBHAGRESNPGHNY ORYVRS

Gur Puhepu bs Pbhagresnpghny Oryvrs unf orra frg hc gb pngre gb nyy jub
qba'g nyybj qrzbafgenoyr gehgu gb trg va gur jnl bs gurve oryvrsf.  Va
nqqvgvba gb perngvba fpvrapr naq gur syngarff bs gur rnegu, gur
sbyybjvat oryvrsf unir orra pregvsvrq ol Cbcr Qhnar nf Puhepu qbtzn:

    --  Gung gurer vf n ubyr va gur Rnegu ng gur Abegu Cbyr sebz juvpu
        HSBf pbzr.
    --  Gung cv rdhnyf cerpvfryl 3.000.
    --  Gung frk pna or rawblrq bayl ol oynpxf naq ubzbfrkhnyf.
    --  Gung Ovyyl Wbr Jvyfba (Ubbcyn, Zvff.) unf fhpprffshyyl fdhnerq
        gur pvepyr.
    --  Gung Uneel Gehzna vf fgvyy cerfvqrag, naq qbvat n svar wbo.
    --  Gung cv rdhnyf cerpvfryl 22/7.

Frireny bgure vzcbegnag pbhagresnpghny oryvrsf ner cerfragyl orvat
fghqvrq, vapyhqvat Erntnabzvpf, N.V., naq gung gur zbba ynaqvatf jrer
qbar va n Ubyyljbbq fcrpvny rssrpgf fghqvb.  Gurfr jvyy or gur fhowrpg
bs n sbegupbzvat Cncny Ohyy ...
%
Vs lbh qba'g pbhag fbzr bs Wrubinu'f vawhapgvbaf, gurer ner ab uhzbevfgf
va gur Ovoyr.
		-- Zbeqrpnv Evpuyre
%
Vs lbh yvxrq gur Rnegu lbh'yy ybir Urnira.
%
Vzntvar gurer'f ab urnira... vg'f rnfl vs lbh gel.
		-- Wbua Yraaba, "Vzntvar"
%
"Va Puevfgvnavgl arvgure zbenyvgl abe eryvtvba pbzr vagb pbagnpg jvgu
ernyvgl ng nal cbvag."
		-- Sevrqevpu Avrgmfpur
%
Va rirel pbhagel naq rirel ntr, gur cevrfg unf orra ubfgvyr gb Yvoregl.
		-- Gubznf Wrssrefba
%
Va ertneqf gb Beny Eboregf' pynvz gung Tbq gbyq uvz gung ur jbhyq qvr hayrff
ur erprvirq $20 zvyyvba ol Znepu, Tbq'f ynjlref unir fgngrq gung gurve pyvrag
unf abg fcbxra jvgu Eboregf sbe frireny lrnef.  Bss gur erpbeq, Tbq unf fgngrq
gung "Vs V unq jnagrq gb vpr gur yvggyr gbnq, V jbhyq unir qbar vg n ybat gvzr
ntb."
		-- Qraavf Zvyyre, FAY Arjf
%
	Va gur ortvavat, Tbq perngrq gur Rnegu naq ur fnvq, "Yrg gurer or zhq."
	Naq gurer jnf zhq.
	Naq Tbq fnvq, "Yrg Hf znxr yvivat perngherf bhg bs zhq, fb gur zhq
pna frr jung jr unir qbar."
	Naq Tbq perngrq rirel yvivat perngher gung abj zbirgu, naq bar jnf
zna.  Zhq-nf-zna nybar pbhyq fcrnx.
	"Jung vf gur checbfr bs nyy guvf?" zna nfxrq cbyvgryl.
	"Rirelguvat zhfg unir n checbfr?" nfxrq Tbq.
	"Pregnvayl," fnvq zna.
	"Gura V yrnir vg gb lbh gb guvax bs bar sbe nyy bs guvf," fnvq Tbq.
	Naq Ur jrag njnl.
		-- Xheg Ibaarthg, Orgjrra Gvzr naq Gvzohxgh"
%
"Vf vg whfg zr, be qbrf nalbar ryfr ernq `ovoyr uhzcref' rirel gvzr
fbzrbar jevgrf `ovoyr guhzcref?'
		-- Wbry Z. Falqre, wzf@zvf.nevmban.rqh
%
Vg vf pbairavrag gung gurer or tbqf, naq, nf vg vf pbairavrag, yrg hf
oryvrir gurer ner.
		-- Choyvhf Bivqvhf Anfb (Bivq)
%
	Vg vf rvgure guebhtu gur vasyhrapr bs anepbgvp cbgvbaf, bs juvpu nyy
cevzvgvir crbcyrf naq enprf fcrnx va ulzaf, be guebhtu gur cbjreshy nccebnpu
bs fcevat, crargengvat jvgu wbl nyy bs angher, gung gubfr Qvbalfvna fgveevatf
nevfr, juvpu va gurve vagrafvsvpngvba yrnq gur vaqvivqhny gb sbetrg uvzfrys
pbzcyrgryl. ... Abg bayl qbrf gur obaq orgjrra zna naq zna pbzr gb or sbetrq
bapr ntnva ol gur zntvp bs gur Qvbalfvna evgr, ohg nyvrangrq, ubfgvyr, be
fhowhtngrq angher ntnva pryroengrf ure erpbapvyvngvba jvgu ure cebqvtny fba,
zna.
		-- Serq Avrgmfpur, Gur Ovegu bs Gentrql
%
"Vg fnlf ur znqr hf nyy gb or whfg yvxr uvz.  Fb vs jr'er qhzo, gura
tbq vf qhzo, naq znlor rira n yvggyr htyl ba gur fvqr."
		-- Senax Mnccn
%
Vg frrzf gung n enoov, n cevrfg naq n zvavfgre qrpvqrq gb tb svfuvat bar
fhaal nsgreabba.  Nyy guerr pyvzorq vagb gur obng naq urnqrq sbe gur zvqqyr
bs gur ynxr.  Nsgre frireny ubhef bs erynkngvba, gur zvavfgre qrpvqrq gung
"angher jnf pnyyvat", naq pyvzorq bhg bs gur obng naq jnyxrq nfuber.  Va
n srj zbzragf, ur jnyxrq onpx bhg gb gur obng naq pyvzorq onpx va.
	Gur enoov jnf nofbyhgryl nfgbavfurq, ohg qrpvqrq abg gb zragvba
gur nccnerag zvenpyr.
	N srj zvahgrf yngre, gur cevrfg nyfb qrpvqrq gb tb nfuber sbe n
zbzrag, naq pyvzorq bhg bs gur obng, jnyxrq gb fuber, naq n srj zvahgrf
yngre pnzr onpx.
	Ol abj gur enoov jnf va terng qvfgerff naq unq ortha gb qbhog uvf
oryvrsf naq jbaqre vs gurer zvtug or fbzr inyvqvgl gb gur Puevfgvna
grnpuvatf.  Ohg ur vzzrqvngryl ernssvezrq gur snpg gung uvf snvgu JNF WHFG
NF FGEBAT nf rvgure gur cevrfg'f be gur zvavfgre'f naq qrpvqrq gung nalguvat
gurl pbhyq qb, jvgu Tbq'f uryc, ur pbhyq qb nf jryy.
	Gur enoov gura naabhaprq gung ur arrqrq eryvrs naq jbhyq jnyx gb
fuber.  Ur pyvzorq bhg bs gur obng naq jrag fgenvtug gb gur obggbz bs gur
ynxr.  Juvyr gur enoov jnf guenfuvat nobhg va gur jngre, gur cevrfg ghearq gb
gur zvavfgre naq fnvq, "Fb... qb lbh guvax jr bhtug gb gryy uvz jurer gur
ebpxf ner?"
%
Vg frrzf gung gurer jnf guvf Puevfgvna nobhg gb or guebja gb gur yvbaf.  Ur
jnf fubirq vagb gur zvqqyr bs gur neran naq gur yvba jnf eryrnfrq.  Orvat
n tbbq Puevfgvna, nf gur yvba nccebnpurq ur xaryg naq cenlrq, nfxvat Tbq sbe
sbetvirarff sbe uvf (srj) fvaf, naq orttvat gung gur yvba zvtug or qvffhnqrq
sebz rngvat uvz sbe vgf oernxsnfg.  Zhpu gb uvf qvfznl, gur yvba qvqa'g fgbc
ohg xrcg pbzvat, trggvat snfgre naq snfgre, abj nyzbfg ehaavat, fb gur
Puevfgvna gbbx bss gbb.  Gurer gurl jrer, ehaavat nebhaq naq nebhaq gur neran,
gur yvba trggvat pybfre naq gur Puevfgvna cenlvat uneqre naq uneqre orgjrra
tnfcf sbe oerngu.  Gur yvbaf oerngu jnf abj ubg hcba uvf urryf naq ur pbhyq
rira srry qebcyrgf bs gur yvbaf fnyvin fcynfuvat ba uvf oner srrg.  Fb ur
chyyrq bhg nyy gur fgbcf, cebzvfvat Tbq gung vs gur yvba jvyy bayl fcner uvz,
ur jvyy qribgr gur erfg bs uvf yvsr gb fcernqvat gur Puevfgvna snvgu,
sbefnxvat nyy grzcgngvba naq cbffrffvbaf.  Fhqqrayl ur ab ybatre sryg gur
yvbaf oerngu, ab ybatre urneq gur terng ornfg'f faneyf pybfr oruvaq uvz.
Fybjvat gb n fgbc, ur ghearq nebhaq naq fnj gur yvba ba vgf xarrf, rlrf ebyyrq
hcjneq, cnjf uryq gbtrgure.  Gur yvba nccrnerq gb or zhggrevat fbzrguvat fb
gur Puevfgvna nccebnpurq hagvy ur pbhyq znxr bhg jung gur yvba jnf fnlvat.

"Qrne Ybeq, sbe jung V nz nobhg gb erprvir..."
%
... vg fgvyy erznvaf gehr gung nf n frg bs pbtavgvir oryvrsf nobhg gur
rkvfgrapr bs Tbq va nal erpbtavmnoyr frafr pbagvahbhf jvgu gur terng
flfgrzf bs gur cnfg, eryvtvbhf qbpgevarf pbafgvghgr n fcrphyngvir
ulcbgurfvf bs na rkgerzryl ybj beqre bs cebonovyvgl.
		-- Fvqarl Ubbx
%
Wrubinu vf na nyvra naq fgvyy guerngraf guvf cynarg!
%
Wrfhf qvrq sbe lbhe fvaf.  Znxr vg jbegu uvf gvzr.
%
Wrfhf unf whfg fgbccrq gur pebjq sebz fgbavat Znel Zntqnyrar gb qrngu
naq vf orengvat gur frys-cvbhf jvgu gur snzbhf fcrrpu, "Yrg gur bar
nzbat lbh jub vf jvgubhg fva pnfg gur svefg fgbar..."
	Evtug nobhg gura, n ebpx pbzrf jvatvat guebhtu gur nve naq uvgf
Wrfhf hcfvqr gur urnq.  Ur juveyf nebhaq naq fubhgf "Nyevtug, Zbz, p'zba!
V'z gelvat gb znxr n cbvag, urer!"
%
Wrfhf Arire Snvyf

(Ur'f arire gnxra gur Znffnpuhfrggf One Rknz, rvgure.)
%
Wrfhf Fnirf!

(Naq Rfcbfvgb fpberf ba gur erobhaq!)
%
Wrfhf Fnirf,
Zbfrf Vairfgf,
Ohg bayl Ohqqun cnlf Qvivqraqf.
%
Wrfhf Fnirf,
Zbfrf Vairfgf,
Ohg bayl Ohqqun cnlf Qvivqraqf.
%
"Wrfhf fnirf...ohg Tergmxl trgf gur erobhaq!"
		-- Qnavry Uvabwbfn
%
Wrfhf jnf xvyyrq ol n Zbeny Znwbevgl.
%
Wbua Cnhy VV vf snzbhf sbe uvf gbhevat, naq uvf dhnvag unovg bs cerffvat
uvf yvcf gb sbervta fbvy ba uvf neeviny.  Guvf fcnexrq fbzr jvg gb erznex:
	"Gur Cbcr unf vg onpxjneqf: ur xvffrf gur tebhaq, naq jnyxf ba
gur jbzra!"
%
YRG Wrfhf or LBHE napube!

Fb jura Fngna ebpxf lbhe obng, GUEBJ Wrfhf bireobneq!
%
Yvggyr Ureovr unq orra oyvaq fvapr ovegu.  Bar qnl ng orqgvzr, uvf zbgure
gbyq uvz gung gur arkg qnl jnf n irel fcrpvny bar.  Vs ur cenlrq rkgen
uneq, ur'q or noyr gb frr jura ur jbxr hc gur arkg zbeavat.  Gur arkg
zbeavat fur pnzr vagb Ureovr'f ebbz naq nfxrq uvz vs ur'q cenlrq uneq
gur avtug orsber.
	"Lrf, Zbzzvr," jnf uvf ercyl, "nyy avtug ybat!"
	"Jryy, gura," fur fnvq, "bcra lbhe rlrf naq lbh'yy xabj gung
lbhe cenlref unir orra nafjrerq."
Yvggyr Ureovr bcrarq uvf rlrf, bayl gb pel bhg,
	"Zbgure! Zbgure! V fgvyy pna'g frr!"
	"V xabj, qrne," fnvq uvf zbgure, "Ncevy Sbby."
%
Zna cebcbfrf, Tbq qvfcbfrf.
		-- Gubznf `n Xrzcvf
%
Znal n ybat qvfchgr orgjrra qvivarf znl guhf or noevqtrq: Vg vf fb.  Vg
vf abg fb.  Vg vf fb.  Vg vf abg fb.
		-- Orawnzva Senaxyva, "Cbbe Evpuneq'f Nyznanpx"
%
Znal n fbore Puevfgvna jbhyq engure nqzvg gung n jnsre vf Tbq guna gung Tbq
vf n pehry naq pncevpvbhf glenag.
		-- Rqjneq Tvooba
%
Zvyvgnag ntabfgvp: V qba'g xabj, naq lbh qba'g rvgure.
%
Zl qnqql'f oenvaf jnf fb fpenzoyrq ur gubhtug ur jnf Wrfhf.  Gurl chg uvz
va n ahg ubhfr sbe 5 lrnef naq jura ur tbg bhg, ur qvqa'g guvax ur jnf
Wrfhf, ur gubhtug ur jnf *Tbq*! ... Juvpu znqr zr Wrfhf.
		-- G. Oljngre
%
Arjfsynfu:
	Nccneragyl gur encgher qvq bpphe ynfg Ghrfqnl nf jnf bevtvanyyl
cerqvpgrq.  Nyy gehr oryvriref jrer genafcbegrq gb urnira juvyr gur erfg
bs hf jrer yrsg oruvaq gb njnvg gur Nagv-Puevfg naq gur raq bs gur jbeyq.
	Jvqrfcernq ercbegf gung gur encgher unq abg bppheerq fgrzzrq sebz
rkcrpgngvbaf gung gur rssrpg jbhyq or zber jvqrfcernq guna vg ghearq bhg
gb or.  Gur qrsvavgvba bs "gehr oryvrire" jnf nccneragyl zber erfgevpgvir
guna rkcrpgrq, ubjrire, naq gur bayl dhnyvsvref jrer n snzvyl bs svir,
yvivat va Fgragba, Abegu Qnxbgn.
%
"Abg bayl vf Tbq qrnq, ohg whfg gel gb svaq n cyhzore ba jrrxraqf."
		-- Jbbql Nyyra
%
Abj vg vf fhpu n ovmneeryl vzcebonoyr pbvapvqrapr gung nalguvat fb zvaq-
obttyvatyl hfrshy pbhyq unir ribyirq cheryl ol punapr gung fbzr guvaxref
unir pubfra gb frr vg nf n svany naq pyvapuvat cebbs bs gur aba-rkvfgrapr
bs Tbq.  Gur nethzrag sbyybjf:  "V ershfr gb cebir gung V rkvfg," fnlf Tbq,
"sbe cebbs qravrf snvgu, naq jvgubhg snvgu V nz abguvat."  "Ohg," fnlf Zna,
"gur Onory svfu vf n qrnq tvirnjnl, vfa'g vg?  Vg pbhyq abg unir ribyirq
ol punapr, guhf cebivat gung lbh rkvfg, gurersber ol lbhe bja nethrzragf,
lbh qba'g.  DRQ."  "Bu, qrne," fnlf Tbq, "V unqa'g gubhtug bs gung," naq
cebzcgyl inavfurf va n chss bs ybtvp.
		-- Q. Nqnzf
%
Bapr ntnva, jr pbzr gb gur Ubyvqnl Frnfba, n qrrcyl eryvtvbhf gvzr gung rnpu
bs hf bofreirf, va uvf bja jnl, ol tbvat gb gur znyy bs uvf pubvpr.

Va gur byq qnlf, vg jnf abg pnyyrq gur Ubyvqnl Frnfba; gur Puevfgvnaf pnyyrq
vg "Puevfgznf" naq jrag gb puhepu; gur Wrjf pnyyrq vg "Unahxxn" naq jrag gb
flantbthr; gur ngurvfgf jrag gb cnegvrf naq qenax.  Crbcyr cnffvat rnpu
bgure ba gur fgerrg jbhyq fnl "Zreel Puevfgznf!" be "Unccl Unahxxn!" be (gb
gur ngurvfgf) "Ybbx bhg sbe gur jnyy!"
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Puevfgznf Fubccvat: N Fheivibe'f Thvqr"
%
Bapr V orybatrq gb n tebhc gung ernyyl unq GUR JBEQ.  V sbhtug yvxr uryy
sbe gurz.  Ohg nabgure tebhc pnzr nybat naq rkcbfrq gur jbeq bs zl tebhc
nf funyybj naq qrtrarengr.  Gurl unq n orggre jbeq.  Fb V dhvg gur svefg
tebhc naq ybfg nyy gur sevraqf V unq znqr naq V wbvarq hc jvgu guvf arj
tebhc.  V sbhtug yvxr uryy sbe gurz.  Ohg nabgure tebhc pnzr nebhaq.  Gurl
rkcbfrq gur jbeq bs zl tebhc nf snyfr naq zngrevnyvfgvp.  Gurve jbeq jnf
irel zhpu orggre.  Fb V dhvg gur frpbaq tebhc naq ybfg nyy gur sevraqf V
unq znqr.  Naq V wbvarq hc jvgu guvf arj tebhc.  V sbhtug yvxr uryy sbe gurz.
Gvyy guvf bar thl pnzr nybat naq cebirq gung gurer jnfa'g nal jbeq ng nyy.
Gung V fubhyq tb bss nf na vaqvivqhny naq tebj!  Fb V dhvg gur ynfg tebhc
naq ybfg nyy gur sevraqf V unq znqr.  Naq abj V fvg ubzr nybar nyy qnl naq
nyy V qb vf tebj.  Vg jbhyq or avpr gb wbva hc jvgu fbzr bguref jub srry
gur jnl V qb.
		-- W. Srvssre
%
Bar zna'f gurbybtl vf nabgure zna'f oryyl ynhtu.
%
Bar bs zl yrff cyrnfnag puberf jura V jnf lbhat jnf gb ernq gur Ovoyr
sebz bar raq gb gur bgure.  Ernqvat gur Ovoyr fgenvtug guebhtu vf ng
yrnfg 70 creprag qvfpvcyvar, yvxr yrneavat Yngva.  Ohg gur tbbq cnegf
ner, bs pbhefr, fvzcyl nznmvat.  Tbq vf na rkgerzryl harira jevgre, ohg
jura Ur'f tbbq, abobql pna gbhpu Uvz.
		-- Wbua Tneqare, ALG Obbx Erivrj, Wna 1983
%
Bar guvat V unir ab jbeel nobhg vf jurgure Tbq rkvfgf.  Ohg vg unf
bppheerq gb zr gung Tbq unf Nymurvzre'f naq unf sbetbggra jr rkvfg.
		-- Wnar Jntare, "Gur Frnepu sbe Fvtaf bs Vagryyvtrag
		   Yvsr va gur Havirefr"
%
Bar, jvgu Tbq, vf nyjnlf n znwbevgl, ohg znal n znegle unf orra ohearq ng
gur fgnxr juvyr gur ibgrf jrer orvat pbhagrq.
		-- Gubznf O. Errq
%
Cnva vf whfg Tbq'f jnl bs uhegvat lbh.
%
Cnfgre Pebffgnyx:	Jung vgrzf ner fcrpvsvpnyyl zragvbarq ol TBQ nf orvat
	hapyrna?  Abj qvq lbh xabj... cerlvat oveqf... cenlvat znagvfrf...
	Nyy oveqf bs cerl, nyy pneevba rngref, svfu rngref -- ab tbbq, pna'g
	rng gubfr.  Abguvat gung qbrf abg unir obgu svaf naq fpnyrf.  Zbfg
	PERRCVAT guvatf...
Nyinenqb:	Ubj 'obhg pngrecvyynef?
C:	N pngrecvyyne qbrfa'g unir n onpxobar.  Abguvat jvgubhg n onpxobar
	pna trg va.
N:	Ubj qb lbh xabj?  Lbh pune n pngrecvyyne, vg trgf erny fgvss!
C:	Jryy, V qba'g guvax gung gur Ybeq zrnag hf gb rng PUNEERQ
	PNGRECVYYNEF!
[...]
C:	Gur ubt, gur fdhveery... yvggyr fdhveeryf.  Jub jbhyq jnag gb rng
	n YVGGYR FDHVEERY?
N:	Vs lbh'er fgneivat.  Vs lbh'er fgneivat va gur cnex bar qnl.
C:	Lbh'q cebonoyl whfg PUNE 'rz gb trg 'rz fgvss, jbhyqa'g ln?
N:	Ab, lbh FVATR 'rz.  Lbh FVATR 'rz naq rng 'rz.  *V* ernq nobhg gur
	Qbaare Cnff, V xabj jung zna qbrf jura ur'f uhatel.
C:	Fdhveeryf rngvat fdhveeryf -- zl TBQ, gung'f fvpx!
N:	Gung'f fvpx, FHER.  Ohg n ZNA rngvat n fdhveery -- gung'f (uru, uru)
	cne sbe gur pbhefr, Puneyvr.
		-- Sverfvta Gurnger
%
Cbcr Tbrfgurirrmy jnf gur fubegrfg ervtavat cbcr va gur uvfgbel bs gur
Puhepu, ervtavat sbe gjb ubhef naq fvk zvahgrf ba 1 Ncevy 1866.  Gur
juvgr fzbxr unq uneqyl snqrq vagb gur oyhr bs gur Ingvpna fxvrf orsber vg
qnjarq ba gur nffrzoyrq zhygvghqrf va Fg. Crgre'f Fdhner gung uvf anzr
unq uvynevbhf cbffvovyvgvrf.  Gur pebjqf sryy nobhg, urycyrff jvgu
ynhtugre, fvatvat
	Unys n cbhaq bs ghccraal evpr
	Unys n cbhaq bs gernpyr
	Gung'f gur jnl gur puvzarl fzbxrf
	Cbcr Tbrfgurirrmy
Gur fdhner jnf svanyyl pyrnerq ol nezrq pnenovarev jvgu grnef bs ynhtugre
fgernzvat qbja gurve snprf.  Gur rirag frg n erpbeq sbe uvynevbhf pvivp
shapgvbaf, fznfuvat gur cerivbhf erpbeq frg jura Oneba Unaf Arvmnag
O"bzcmvqnvmr jnf ryrpgrq Ynaqoheture bs X"bya va 1653.
		-- Zvxr Uneqvat, "Gur Nezpunve Nanepuvfg'f Nyznanp"
%
Cenvfr gur Ybeq naq cnff gur nzzhavgvba.
                -- Fgrcura Pbbagf, "Gur Zvabgnhe"
%
Cevfbaf ner ohvyg jvgu fgbarf bs Ynj, oebguryf jvgu oevpxf bs Eryvtvba.
		-- Oynxr
%
Eryvtvba unf qbar ybir n terng freivpr ol znxvat vg n fva.
		-- Nangbyr Senapr
%
Eryvtvba vf n pehgpu, ohg gung'f bxnl... uhznavgl vf n pevccyr.
%
Eryvtvba vf svar, Puhepuvnavgl fhpxf.
%
Eryvtvba vf jung xrrcf gur cbbe sebz zheqrevat gur evpu.
		-- Ancbyrba
%
Eryvtvbaf eribyir znqyl nebhaq frkhny dhrfgvbaf.
%
Frrzf yvxr gurfr sbhe enoovf unq n frevrf bs gurbybtvpny nethzragf, naq guerr
jrer nyjnlf va nppbeq ntnvafg gur sbhegu.  Bar qnl, gur bqq enoov bhg, jvgu
gur hfhny "3 gb 1, znwbevgl ehyrf" fgngrzrag gung fvtavsvrq gung ur unq ybfg
ntnva, qrpvqrq gb nccrny gb n uvture nhgubevgl.  "Bu, Tbq!" ur pevrq.  "V
xabj va zl urneg gung V nz evtug naq gurl ner jebat!  Cyrnfr fubj zr n fvta,
fb gurl gbb jvyy xabj gung V haqrefgnaq Lbhe ynjf."
	Vg jnf n ornhgvshy, fhaal qnl.  Nf fbba nf gur enoov svavfurq uvf
cynvag, n fgbez pybhq zbirq npebff gur fxl nobir gur sbhe.  Vg ehzoyrq bapr
naq qvffbyirq.  "N fvta sebz Tbq!  Frr, V'z evtug, V xarj vg!"  Ohg gur bgure
guerr qvfnterrq, cbvagvat bhg gung fgbezpybhqf sbez ba ubg qnlf.
	Fb ur nfxrq ntnva: "Bu, Tbq, V arrq n ovttre fvta gb fubj gung V nz
evtug naq gurl ner jebat.  Fb cyrnfr, Tbq, n ovttre fvta."
	Guvf gvzr sbhe fgbezpybhqf nccrnerq, ehfurq gbjneq rnpu bgure gb sbez
bar ovt pybhq, naq n obyg bs yvtugavat xabpxrq qbja n gerr gra srrg njnl sebz
gur enoovf.  Gur pybhq qvfcrefrq ng bapr.  "V gbyq lbh V jnf evtug!" vafvfgrq
gur ybare, ohg gur bguref vafvfgrq gung abguvat unq unccrarq gung pbhyq abg
or rkcynvarq ol angheny pnhfrf.
	Gur vafvfgvat enoov vf nyy ernql gb nfx sbe n *irel ovt* fvta jura
whfg nf ur fnlf "Bu Tbq..." gur fxl gheaf cvgpu oynpx, gur rnegu funxrf, naq
n qrrc, obbzvat ibvpr vagbarf, "URRRRRRRR'F EVVVVVVVTUG!"
	Gur fxl ergheaf gb abezny.  Gur bar enoov chgf uvf unaqf ba uvf uvcf
naq faneyf, "Jryy?"  "Bxnl, bxnllll," ercyvrq nabgure, "fb abj vg'f 3 gb 2!"
%
Frrzf yvxr guvf snezre chepunfrq na byq, eha-qbja, nonaqbarq snez jvgu cynaf
gb ghea vg vagb n guevivat ragrecevfr.  Gur svryqf ner tebja bire jvgu jrrqf,
gur snezubhfr vf snyyvat ncneg, naq gur sraprf ner pbyyncfvat nyy nebhaq.
Qhevat uvf svefg qnl bs jbex, gur gbja cernpure fgbcf ol gb oyrff gur zna'f
jbex, cenlvat, "Znl lbh naq Tbq jbex gbtrgure gb znxr guvf gur snez bs lbhe
qernzf!"
	N srj zbaguf yngre, gur cernpure fgbcf ol ntnva gb pnyy ba gur snezre.
Yb naq orubyq, vg'f yvxr n pbzcyrgryl qvssrerag cynpr -- gur snez ubhfr vf
pbzcyrgryl erohvyg naq va rkpryyrag pbaqvgvba, gurer vf cyragl bs pnggyr naq
bgure yvirfgbpx unccvyl zhapuvat ba srrq va jryy-sraprq craf, naq gur svryqf
ner svyyrq jvgu pebcf cynagrq va arng ebjf.  "Nznmvat!" gur cernpure fnlf.
"Ybbx jung Tbq naq lbh unir nppbzcyvfurq gbtrgure!"
	"Lrf, erireraq," ercyvrf gur snezre, "ohg erzrzore jung gur snez jnf
yvxr jura Tbq jnf jbexvat vg nybar!"
%
Fur fnl, Zvff Pbyvr, Lbh orggre uhfu.  Tbq zvtug urne lbh.  Yrg 'vz urne zr,
V fnl.  Vs ur rire yvfgrarq gb cbbe pbyberq jbzra gur jbeyq jbhyq or n
qvssrerag cynpr, V pna gryy lbh.
		-- Nyvpr Jnyxre, "Gur Pbybe Checyr"
%
Fv Qvrh a'rkvfgnvg cnf, vy snhqenvg y'vairagre.
	[Vs Tbq qvq abg rkvfg, vg jbhyq or arprffnel gb vairag uvz.]
		-- Ibygnver
%
Fvkghf I, Cbcr sebz 1585 gb 1590 nhgubevmrq n cevagvat bs gur Ihytngr
Ovoyr.  Gnxvat ab punaprf, gur cbcr vffhrq n cncny ohyy nhgbzngvpnyyl
rkpbzzhavpngvat nal cevagre jub zvtug znxr na nygrengvba va gur grkg.
Guvf ur beqrerq cevagrq ng gur ortvaavat bs gur Ovoyr.  Ur crefbanyyl
rknzvarq rirel furrg nf vg pnzr bss gur cerff.  Lrg gur choyvfurq
Ihytngr Ovoyr pbagnvarq fb znal reebef gung pbeerpgrq fpencf unq gb or
cevagrq naq cnfgrq bire gurz va rirel pbcl.  Gur erfhyg cebibxrq jel
pbzzragf ba gur engure cngpul cncny vasnyyvovyvgl, naq Cbcr Fvkghf unq
ab erpbhefr ohg gb beqre gur erghea naq qrfgehpgvba bs rirel pbcl.
%
Fzvyr, Pguhyuh Ybngurf Lbh.
%
Fb sne nf V pna erzrzore, gurer vf abg bar jbeq va gur Tbfcryf va cenvfr bs
vagryyvtrapr.
		-- Oregenaq Ehffryy
%
Fb, vs gurer'f ab Tbq, jub punatrf gur jngre?
		-- Arj Lbexre pnegbba bs gjb tbyqsvfu va n objy
%
Fb, jung'f jvgu guvf thl Tvqrba, naljnl?  Naq jul pna'g ur rire erzrzore
uvf Ovoyr?
%
Fb... ubj pbzr gur Pbevaguvnaf arire jebgr onpx?
%
Fbzr crbcyr frrz gb guvax gung "qnza" vf Tbq'f ynfg anzr.
%
Fbzr guvatf unir gb or oryvrirq gb or frra.
%
Fhpu rivy qrrqf pbhyq eryvtvba cebzcg.
		-- Gvghf Yhpergvhf Pnehf
%
Fher onaxvat vf Ovoyvpny!

Ubj nobhg jura Bana erprvirq n fhofgnagvny cranygl sbe rneyl jvguqenjny?
Be jura Cunenbu'f qnhtugre jrag vagb gur ohyehfurf naq pnzr bhg jvgu n
yvggyr cebcurg?  Naq vg jnf Zbfrf jub yrq gur Puvyqera bs Vfenry gb gur
Onaxf bs gur Wbeqna!
%
Gnbvfz: Fuvg Unccraf.
Pbashpvnavfz: Pbashpvbhf fnl, "Fuvg Unccraf".
Ohqquvfz: Vs fuvg unccraf, vg vfa'g ernyyl fuvg.
Uvaqhvfz: Guvf fuvg unf unccrarq orsber.
Cebgrfgnagvfz: Fuvg unccraf, ohg vg unccraf gb fbzrbar ryfr.
Pngubyvpvfz: Fuvg unccraf, ohg lbh qrfreirq vg.
Whqnvfz: Jul qbrf fuvg nyjnlf unccra gb HF?
%
Grezvgre'f nethzrag gung Tbq vf Uvf bja tenaqzbgure trarengrq n fhecevfvat
nzbhag bs pbagebirefl nzbat Puhepu yrnqref, jub ba gur bar unaq pbafvqrerq
gur nethzrag hafhccbegrq ol fpevcgher ohg ba gur bgure unaq jrer hajvyyvat
gb evfx bssraqvat Tbq'f tenaqzbgure.
		-- Yra Pbby, "Nzrevpna Cvr"
%
Greghyyvna jnf obea va Pneguntr fbzrjurer nobhg 160 N.Q.  Ur jnf n cntna,
naq ur nonaqbarq uvzfrys gb gur ynfpvivbhf yvsr bs uvf pvgl hagvy nobhg
uvf 35gu lrne, jura ur orpnzr n Puevfgvna. [...]  Gb uvz vf nfpevorq gur
fhoyvzr pbasrffvba: Perqb dhvn nofheqhz rfg (V oryvrir orpnhfr vg vf nofheq).
Guvf qbrf abg nygbtrgure nppbeq jvgu uvfgbevpny snpg, sbe ur zreryl fnvq:
	"Naq gur Fba bs Tbq qvrq, juvpu vf vzzrqvngryl perqvoyr orpnhfr vg
	vf nofheq.  Naq ohevrq ur ebfr ntnva, juvpu vf pregnva orpnhfr vg
	vf vzcbffvoyr."
Gunaxf gb gur nphgrarff bs uvf zvaq, ur fnj guebhtu gur cbiregl bs
cuvybfbcuvpny naq Tabfgvp xabjyrqtr, naq pbagrzcghbhfyl erwrpgrq vg.
		-- P.T. What, "Cflpubybtvpny Glcrf"
	[Greghyyvna jnf bar bs gur sbhaqref bs gur Pngubyvp Puhepu.  Rq.]
%
"Gung'f ab nafjre," Wbo fnvq, "Naq sbe fbzrbar jub'f fhccbfrq gb or
bzavcbgrag, yrg zr gryy lbh 'gnoreanpyr' unf bayl bar y."
		-- Jbbql Nyyra, "Jvgubhg Srnguref"
%
Gur Ovoyr vf abg zl Obbx naq Puevfgvnavgl vf abg zl eryvtvba.  V pbhyq
arire tvir nffrag gb gur ybat pbzcyvpngrq fgngrzragf bs Puevfgvna qbtzn.
		-- Noenunz Yvapbya
%
Gur pyretl fhpprffshyyl cernpurq gur qbpgevarf bs cngvrapr naq chfvyynavzvgl;
gur npgvir iveghrf bs fbpvrgl jrer qvfpbhentrq; naq gur ynfg erznvaf bs n
zvyvgnel fcvevg jrer ohevrq va gur pybvfgre: n ynetr cbegvba bs choyvp naq
cevingr jrnygu jnf pbafrpengrq gb gur fcrpvbhf qrznaqf bs punevgl naq qribgvba;
naq gur fbyqvref' cnl jnf ynivfurq ba gur hfryrff zhygvghqrf bs obgu frkrf
jub pbhyq bayl cyrnq gur zrevgf bs nofgvarapr naq punfgvgl.
		-- Rqjneq Tvoobaf, "Gur Qrpyvar naq Snyy bs gur Ebzna Rzcver"
%
Gur qnl jvyy pbzr jura gur zlfgvpny trarengvba bs Wrfhf, ol gur Fhcerzr Orvat
nf uvf Sngure, va gur jbzo bs n ivetva jvyy or pynffvsvrq jvgu gur snoyr bs
gur trarengvba bs Zvarein va gur oenva bs Whcvgre.  Ohg jr znl ubcr gung gur
qnja bs ernfba naq serrqbz bs gubhtug va gurfr Havgrq Fgngrf jvyy qb njnl jvgu
guvf negvsvpvny fpnssbyqvat naq erfgber gb hf gur cevzvgvir naq trahvar
qbpgevarf bs guvf zbfg irarengrq Ersbezre bs uhzna reebef.
		-- Gubznf Wrssrefba
%
	Gur qribhg Wrj jnf orfvqr uvzfrys orpnhfr uvf fba unq orra qngvat
n fuvxfn, fb ur jrag gb ivfvg uvf enoov.  Gur enoov yvfgrarq fbyrzayl gb
uvf ceboyrz, gbbx uvf unaq, naq fnvq, "Cenl gb Tbq."
	Fb gur Wrj jrag gb gur flantbthr, objrq uvf urnq, naq cenlrq, "Tbq,
cyrnfr uryc zr.  Zl fba, zl snibevgr fba, ur'f tbvat gb zneel n fuvxfn, ur
frrf abguvat ohg tblvz..."
	"Lbhe fba," obbzrq qbja guvf ibvpr sebz gur urniraf, "lbh guvax
lbh tbg ceboyrzf.  Jung nobhg zl fba?"
%
Gur qvivavgl bs Wrfhf vf znqr n pbairavrag pbire sbe nofheqvgl.  Abjurer va
gur Tbfcryf qb jr svaq n cerprcg sbe Perrqf, Pbasrffvbaf, Bnguf, Qbpgevarf,
naq jubyr pneybnqf bs bgure sbbyvfu gehzcrel gung jr svaq va Puevfgvnavgl.
		-- Wbua Nqnzf
%
"Gur rnfl pbasvqrapr jvgu juvpu V xabj nabgure zna'f eryvtvba vf sbyyl
grnpurf zr gb fhfcrpg gung zl bja vf nyfb."

"V jbhyq abg vagresrer jvgu nal bar'f eryvtvba, rvgure gb fgeratgura vg
be gb jrnxra vg.  V nz abg noyr gb oryvrir bar'f eryvtvba pna nssrpg uvf
urernsgre bar jnl be gur bgure, ab znggre jung gung eryvtvba znl or.
Ohg vg znl rnfvyl or n terng pbzsbeg gb uvz va guvf yvsr -- urapr vg vf n
inyhnoyr cbfrffvba gb uvz."

"V qb abg frr ubj rgreany chavfuzrag urernsgre pbhyq nppbzcyvfu nal tbbq
raq, gurersber V nz abg noyr gb oryvrir va vg. Gb punfgra n zna va beqre
gb cresrpg uvz zvtug or ernfbanoyr rabhtu; gb naavuvyngr uvz jura ur funyy
unir cebirq uvzfrys vapncnoyr bs ernpuvat cresrpgvba zhtug or ernfbanoyr
rabhtu; ohg gb ebnfg uvz sberire sbe gur zrer fngvfsnpgvba bs frrvat uvz
ebnfg jbhyq abg or ernfbanoyr -- rira gur ngebpvbhf Tbq vzntvarq ol gur Wrjf
jbhyq gver bs gur fcrpgnpyr riraghnyyl."
		-- Znex Gjnva
%
Gur rphzravpny zbirzrag unf ernpurq n zvyrfgbar jvgu gur nterrzrag ba gur
grkg bs gur svefg Wrjvfu-Pngubyvp cenlre -- bar gung ortvaf "Bl inl, Znevn".
%
... Gur Sngure, gur Fba naq gur Ubyl Tubfg jbhyq arire guebj gur Qrivy
bhg bs Urnira nf ybat nf gurl fgvyy arrq uvz nf n sbhegu sbe oevqtr.
		-- Yrggre va ARJ YVOREGNEVNA ABGRF #19
%
Gur svefg naq nyzbfg gur bayl Obbx qrfreivat bs havirefny nggragvba vf
gur Ovoyr.
		-- Wbua Dhvapl Nqnzf

Nyy gur tbbq sebz gur Fnivbhe bs gur jbeyq vf pbzzhavpngrq guebhtu guvf Obbx;
ohg sbe gur Obbx jr pbhyq abg xabj evtug sebz jebat.  Nyy gur guvatf qrfvenoyr
gb zna ner pbagnvarq va vg.
		-- Noenunz Yvapbya

... gur Ovoyr ... vf gur bar fhcerzr fbhepr bs eriryngvba bs gur zrnavat bs
yvsr, gur angher bs Tbq naq fcveghny angher naq arrq bs zra.  Vg vf gur bayl
thvqr bs yvsr juvpu ernyyl yrnqf gur fcvevg va gur jnl bs crnpr naq fnyingvba.
		-- Jbbqebj Jvyfba
%
Gur tbbq Puevfgvna fubhyq orjner bs zngurzngvpvnaf naq nyy gubfr jub znxr rzcgl
cebcurpvrf.  Gur qnatre nyernql rkvfgf gung zngurzngvpvnaf unir znqr n pbiranag
jvgu gur qrivy gb qnexra gur fcvevg naq pbasvar zna va gur obaqf bs Uryy.
		-- Fg. Nhthfgvar
%
Gur vasyvpgvba bs pehrygl jvgu n tbbq pbafpvrapr vf n qryvtug gb zbenyvfgf.
Gung vf jul gurl vairagrq uryy.
		-- Oregenaq Ehffryy
%
Gur Vfenryvgrf jrer nyy jnvgvat nakvbhfyl ng gur sbbg bs gur zbhagnva,
xabjvat gung Zbfrf unq unq n gbhtu qnl artbgvngvat jvgu Tbq bire gur
Pbzznaqzragf.  Svanyyl n gverq Zbfrf pnzr vagb fvtug.
	"V'ir tbg fbzr tbbq arjf naq fbzr onq arjf, sbyxf," ur fnvq.  "Gur
tbbq arjf vf gung V tbg Uvz qbja gb gra.  Gur onq arjf vf gung nqhygrel'f
fgvyy va."
%
Gur Ybeq tvirgu naq gur Ybeq gnxrgu njnl.
Vaqvna Tvire or gur anzr bs gur Ybeq.
%
Gur Zrffvnu jvyy pbzr.  Gurer jvyy or n erfheerpgvba bs gur qrnq -- nyy
gur guvatf gung Wrjf oryvrirq va orsber gurl tbg fb qnza fbcuvfgvpngrq.
		-- Enoov Zrve Xnunar
%
Gur Zbfg Hafhpprffshy Irefvba Bs Gur Ovoyr
	Gur zbfg rkpvgvat irefvba bs gur Ovoyr jnf cevagrq va 1631 ol Eboreg
Onexre naq Znegva Yhpnf, gur Xvat'f cevagref ng Ybaqba.  Vg pbagnvarq
frireny zvfgnxrf, ohg bar jnf vafcverq -- gur jbeq "abg" jnf bzvggrq sebz
gur Friragu Pbzznaqzrag naq rawbvarq vgf ernqref, ba gur uvturfg nhgubevgl,
gb pbzzvg nqhygrel.
	Srnevat gur cbchynevgl jvgu juvpu guvf zvtug or erprvirq va erzbgr
pbhagel qvfgevpgf, Xvat Puneyrf V pnyyrq nyy 1,000 pbcvrf onpx va naq svarq
gur cevagref Y3,000.
		-- Fgrcura Cvyr, "Gur Obbx bs Urebvp Snvyherf"
%
Gur arnere gb gur puhepu, gur shegure sebz Tbq.
		-- Wbua Urljbbq
%
Gur arj cevrfg jnf fb areibhf nobhg cresbezvat uvf svefg znff gung ur pbhyq
uneqyl fcrnx.  Ur nfxrq uvf Zbafvtabe ubj ur pbhyq erynk.  Gur Zbafvtabe
ercyvrq gung vg zvtug uryc erynk uvz gb nqq whfg n ovg bs ibqxn gb gur jngre
cvgpure.  Gur arkg Fhaqnl, nsgre sbyybjvat gur Zbafvtabe'f nqivpr, gur cevrfg
erghearq gb gur erpgbel gb svaq n abgr sebz gung jbegul.

	(1) Arkg gvzr fvc engure guna thyc.
	(2) Gurer ner gra pbzznaqzragf, abg 12.
	(3) Gurer ner 12 qvfpvcyrf, abg 10.
	(4) Jr qb abg ersre gb gur pebff nf gur "Ovt G".
	(5) Gur erpbzzraqrq tenpr orsber zrnyf vf abg,
		"Eho-n-qho-qho, gunaxf sbe gur teho, Lnnnnl, Tbq!"
	(6) Qb abg ersre gb bhe Fnivbhe, Wrfhf Puevfg, naq uvf
		Ncbfgyrf nf "W.P. naq gur Oblf".
	(7) Qnivq fyrj Tbyvngu, ur qvq abg xvpx gur fuvg bhg bs uvz.
	(8) Gur Sngure, Fba, naq gur Ubyl Tubfg ner arire ersreerq
		gb nf, "Ovt Qnqql, Whavbe, naq gur Fcbbx".
	(9) Vg vf nyjnlf gur Ivetva Znel, arire Gur Znel jvgu gur Pureel.
	(10) Ynfg, ohg abg yrnfg, arkg Jrqarfqnl gurer jvyy or n
		Gnssl-Chyyvat Pbagrfg ng Fg.Crgre'f, abg n Crgre-Chyyvat
		Pbagrfg ng Fg. Gnssl'f.
%
Gur bayl rkphfr sbe Tbq vf gung ur qbrfa'g rkvfg.
		-- Fgraquny
%
Gur bayl guvat gung fgbcf Tbq sebz fraqvat n frpbaq Sybbq vf gung
gur svefg bar jnf hfryrff.
		-- Avpbynf Punzsbeg
%
Gur cevrfg ng Fhaqnl znff abgvprq gung Zvpunry gbbx n gra-qbyyne ovyy naq gjb
bar-qbyyne ovyyf sebz gur pbyyrpgvba cyngr, vafgrnq bs chggvat fbzrguvat va.
Ur gubhtug gb uvzfrys, V'q orggre jngpu bhg sbe Zvpunry.  Gur arkg jrrx ur
abgvprq gur fnzr guvat.  Fb ur jnvgrq bhgfvqr puhepu jura znff jnf bire, naq
nf Zvpunry pnzr bhg, ur nppbfgrq uvf naq fnvq,
	"Zvpunry, gryy zr -- jul qvq lbh gnxr bhg n gra-qbyyne ovyy naq gjb
fvatyrf gjb jrrxf va n ebj, vafgrnq bs chggvat zbarl vagb gur pbyyrpgvba?"
	Zvpunry ercyvrq, "Sngure, V'z rzoneenffrq, ohg V qvq vg orpnhfr V
jnagrq gb tb qbjagbja sbe n oybj wbo."
	Gur cevrfg ybbxrq fhcevfrq ohg fnvq gb Zvpunry, "Yvfgra, qba'g qb
gung nalzber.  V'yy or jngpuvat lbh sebz abj ba."
	Jura ur tbg onpx gb gur erpgbel, gur cevrfg jnf fgvyy crecyrkrq.
Svanyyl ur qrpvqrq gb pnyy Zbgure Ntngun ng gur pbairag.  Ur fnvq, "Zbgure,
lbh'ir orra fhpu n terng sevraq bs zvar, V unir n dhrfgvba V arrq gb nfx lbh.
Jung vf n oybj wbo?"
	Zbgure Ntngun ercyvrq, "Bu, gjryir qbyynef, fnzr nf qbjagbja."
%
Gur ernfba Ebzna Pngubyvpf ner nyybjrq gb hfr gur eulguz zrgubq bs ovegu
pbageby vf gung vg qbrfa'g jbex.
%
Gur fbzrjung byq naq pehfgl ivpne jnf gnxvat n jryy-rnearq ergverzrag sebz
uvf engure byq naq pehfgl cnevfu.  Nf vf hfhny va gurfr pnfrf, n ybphz jnf
frag gb pbire gur genafvgvba crevbq.  Guvf cnegvphyne zna jnf lbhat naq
npgvir, naq unq gur fgenatr abgvba gung puhepu fubhyq nyfb or npgvir naq
rkpvgvat.  Nf n pbafrdhrapr ur jnf zber guna n yvggyr qvffncbvagrq jvgu gur
qhyy naq genqvgvba-obhaq puhepu.  Ur qrpvqrq gb qb fbzrguvat nobhg vg.
	Sbe uvf svefg Fhaqnl, ur qvqa'g jrne gur genqvgvbany eborf naq
irfgzragf, ohg yrnq gur freivpr jrnevat n avpr 2-cvrpr fhvg.  Gur pbatertngvba
jnf ubeevsvrq!  Ur punatrq gur beqre bs gur freivpr.  Gur pbatertngvba jnf
ubeevsvrq!  Gura pnzr gur puvyqera'f yrffba.
	Sbe guvf ur pnzr bhg bs gur chycvg, naq fng ba gur pbzzhavba gnoyr.
Gur pbatertngvba jnf zbegvsvrq!  Ur fng gurer fjvatvat uvf yrtf ntnvafg
gur gnoyr nf gur puvyqera tngurerq nebhaq uvz.
	Ur nfxrq gur puvyqera, "Jung'f fznyy, oebja, sheel naq rngf ahgf?"
	Gurer jnf gbgny fvyrapr.
	Ur nfxrq ntnva, "Jung'f fznyy, oebja, sheel naq rngf ahgf?"
	Gbgny fvyrapr.
	Riraghnyyl, bar gvzvq lbhatfgre chg hc uvf unaq naq fnvq, "Cyrnfr,
fve, V xabj gur nafjre vf Wrfhf, ohg vg fher fbhaqf yvxr n fdhveery gb zr."
%
Gur Havgnevnaf ner ernyyl whfg n ohapu bs ngurvfgf jub ernyyl yvxr tbvat gb
puhepu.
%
Gur Hgnu irefvba bs guvf wbxr tbrf:
	Bar bs gur Pbhapvy bs gur Gjryir ehaf oernguyrffyl vagb gur Cerfvqragf'
bssvpr bar qnl.  Gur Cerfvqrag ybbxf hc naq fnlf "Oebgure, jung vf fb vzcbegnag
gung lbh ena nyy gur jnl urer, ybfvat lbhe oerngu?"
	Gur Pbhapvy zrzore svanyyl ertnvaf uvf oerngu, naq fnlf "Gur Fnivbe vf
va gur ybool!!"
	Gur Cerfvqrag vzzrqvngr fgnegf sbe gur qbbe, pelvat "Vg unf pbzr!  Gur
cebcurpvrf ner shyysvyyrq!  Jr ner nyy nobhg gb or hcyvsgrq!"
	Gur Pbhapvy zrzore fnlf "Jnvg!  Lbh qvqa'g yrg zr svavfu!  Fur'f...
oynpx, naq FUR VF CVFFRQ!"
%
Gur jntrf bs fva ner uvtu -- hayrff lbh xabj fbzrbar jub qbrf vg sbe abguvat.
%
Gur jubyr eryvtvbhf pbzcyrkvba bs gur zbqrea jbeyq vf qhr gb gur nofrapr
sebz Wrehfnyrz bs n yhangvp nflyhz.
		-- Unirybpx Ryyvf
%
Gurbybtl vf na nggrzcg gb rkcynva n fhowrpg ol zra jub qb abg haqrefgnaq
vg.  Gur vagrag vf abg gb gryy gur gehgu ohg gb fngvfsl gur dhrfgvbare.
		-- Ryoreg Uhooneq
%
Gurer ner ab culfvpvfgf va gur ubggrfg cnegf bs uryy, orpnhfr gur rkvfgrapr
bs n "ubggrfg cneg" vzcyvrf n grzcrengher qvssrerapr, naq nal znetvanyyl
pbzcrgrag culfvpvfg jbhyq vzzrqvngryl hfr guvf gb eha n urng ratvar naq znxr
fbzr bgure cneg bs uryy pbzsbegnoyl pbby.  Guvf vf boivbhfyl vzcbffvoyr.
		-- Evpuneq Qnivffba
%
"Gurer vf n Tbq, ohg Ur qevaxf"
		-- Oyber
%
Gurer vf n yvzvg gb gur nqzvengvba jr znl ubyq sbe n zna jub fcraqf
uvf jnxvat ubhef cbxvat gur pbagragf bs puvpxraf jvgu n fgvpx.
		-- Gbz Eboovaf, "Wvggreoht Creshzr"
%
Gurer vf ab bk fb qhzo nf gur begubqbk.
		-- Trbetr Senapvf Tvyyrggr
%
Guvf fgbel pbapreaf n zna jub, nsgre chggvat uvf fba gb orq rnpu avtug, jbhyq
fgnaq ol uvf obl'f qbbe naq yvfgra gb uvf fba fnlvat uvf cenlref.  Bar avtug,
gur obl raqrq uvf cenlref jvgu, "Tbq fcrpvnyyl oyrff Tenaqqnq, jub jba'g or
jvgu hf zhpu ybatre."  Gur zna gubhtug guvf jnf engure phevbhf, ohg cnffrq vg
bss nf puvyqvfu juvzfl.  Gur arkg qnl, ubjrire, ur erprvirq n pnyy sebz uvf
zbgure, vasbezvat uvz gung uvf sngure unq cnffrq njnl rneyl gung zbeavat.
Qhevat gur arkg srj jrrxf, ur yvfgrarq cnegvphyneyl pybfryl gb uvf fba'f
cenlref, ohg abgvprq abguvat hahfhny.  Gura, bar avtug, gur obl raqrq uvf
cenlref jvgu, "Tbq fcrpvnyyl oyrff Tenaqzbz, jub jba'g or jvgu hf zhpu ybatre."
Nygubhtu gur fubpx bs gur bevtvany vapvqrag unq jbea bss qhevat gur vagreiravat
jrrxf, ur abaguryrff cubarq uvf zbgure gb vadhver nf gb ure urnygu.  Ur jrag gb
orq ernffherq, bayl gb or njnxrarq va gur avtug ol uvf fvfgre pnyyvat jvgu gur
arjf gung gurve zbgure unq qvrq fhqqrayl va gur avtug.  Gur sngure unq n frevrf
bs cflpubybtvpny grfgf qbar; abguvat hahfhny jnf hapbirerq.  Nobhg n zbagu 
yngre, gur obl raqrq uvf cenlref jvgu, "Tbq fcrpvnyyl oyrff Qnqql, jub jba'g
or jvgu hf zhpu ybatre."  Gur zna jnf cnavp-fgevpxra, pregnva gung ur jnf 
tbvat gb qvr qhevat gur avtug.  Ur erfbyirq gb fgnl njnxr nyy avtug; vs njnxr 
naq nyreg ur fubhyq or noyr gb cerirag nal gentrql.  Zbeavat pnzr.  Oernguvat
n uhtr fvtu bs eryvrs, ur jrag gb trg gur cncre bss gur cbepu.  Gurer, ylvat
qrnq ba gur qbbefgrc, jnf gur zvyxzna.
%
Gb or cngevbgvp, ungr nyy angvbaf ohg lbhe bja; gb or eryvtvbhf, nyy frpgf
ohg lbhe bja; gb or zbeny, nyy cergrafrf ohg lbhe bja.
		-- Yvbary Fgenpurl
%
Gb yvfgra gb fbzr qribhg crbcyr, bar jbhyq vzntvar gung Tbq arire ynhtuf.
		-- Fev Nhebovaqb
%
GB GUBFR BS LBH JUB QRFVER VG, V TENAG LBH ZNQENX'F OYRFFVAT:

	Vafbsne nf V znl or urneq ol nalguvat, juvpu znl be znl abg pner
jung V fnl, V nfx, vs vg znggref, gung lbh or sbetvira sbe nalguvat lbh
znl unir qbar be snvyrq gb qb juvpu erdhverf sbetvirarff.
	Pbairefryl, vs abg sbetvirarff ohg fbzrguvat ryfr or erdhverq
gb vafher nal cbffvoyr orarsvg sbe juvpu lbh znl or ryvtvoyr nsgre gur
qrfgehpgvba bs lbhe obql, V nfx gung guvf, jungrire vg znl or, or tenagrq
be jvguuryq, nf gur pnfr znl or, va fhpu n znaare nf gb vafher lbhe
erprivat fnvq orarsvg.
	V nfx guvf va zl pncnpvgl nf lbhe ryrpgrq vagrezrqvnel orgjrra
lbhefrys naq gung juvpu znl unir na vagrerfg va gur znggre bs lbhe erprivat
nf zhpu nf vg vf cbffvoyr sbe lbh gb erprvir bs guvf guvat, naq juvpu znl
va fbzr jnl or vasyhraprq ol guvf prerzbal.
	Nzra.
		-- Ebtre Mrynmal, "Perngherf bs Yvtug naq Qnexarff"
%
"Gb LBH V'z na ngurvfg; gb Tbq, V'z gur Yblny Bccbfvgvba."
		-- Jbbql Nyyra
%
Havgnevnaf cenl "Gb jubz vg znl pbaprea".
%
Ingvpna hcubyqf ona ba pbagenprcgvirf: "Gb urve vf uhznar," pynvzf gur Cbcr.
%
Jr ... znxr gur zbqrea reebe bs qvtavslvat gur Vaqvivqhny.  Jr qb rirelguvat
jr pna gb ohggre uvz hc.  Jr tvir uvz n anzr, nffher uvz gung ur unf pregnva
vanyvranoyr evtugf, rqhpngr uvz, yrg uvz cnff ba uvf anzr gb uvf oengf naq
jura ur qvrf jr tvir uvz n fcrpvny ubyr va gur tebhaq ... Ohg nsgre nyy, ur'f
bayl  n frrq, n oybbz naq n jvgurevat fgnyx nzbat cerffvat ovyyvbaf.  Lbhe
Vaqvivqhny vf n cerggl qvfthfgvat, inva, yrjq yvggyr onfgneq ... Ol Tbq,
ur unf bayl bar evtug thnenagrrq uvz va Angher, naq gung vf gur evtug gb qvr
naq fgvax gb Urnira.
		-- Ebff Ybpxevqtr, dhbgrq va "Fubeg Yvirf" ol Xngvaxn Zngfba
%
Jr znl abg or noyr gb crefhnqr Uvaqhf gung Wrfhf naq abg Ivfuah fubhyq tbirea
gurve fcvevghny ubevmba, abe Zbfyrzf gung Ybeq Ohqqun vf ng gur pragre bs
gurve fcvevghny havirefr, abe Uroerjf gung Zbunzzrq vf n znwbe cebucrg, abe
Puevfgvnaf gung Fuvagb orfg rkcerffrf gurve fcvevghny pbapreaf, gb fnl
abguvat bs gur snpg gung jr znl abg or noyr gb trg Puevfgvnaf gb nterr nzbat
gurzfryirf nobhg gurve eryngvbafuvc gb Tbq.  Ohg nyy jvyy nterr ba n
cebcbfvgvba gung gurl cbffrff cebsbhaq fcvevghny erfbheprf.  Vs, va nqqvgvba,
jr pna trg gurz gb npprcg gur shegure cebcbfvgvba gung jungrire sbez gur Qrvgl
znl unir va gurve bja gurbybtl, gur Qrvgl vf abg bayl rkgreany, ohg vagreany
naq npgf guebhtu gurz, naq gurl gurzfryirf tvir cebbs be qvfcebbs bs gur
Qrvgl va jung gurl qb naq guvax; vs guvf shegure cebcbfvgvba pna or npprcgrq,
gura jr pbzr gung zhpu pybfre gb n gehyl eryvtvbhf fvghngvba ba rnegu.
		-- Abezna Pbhfvaf, sebz uvf obbx "Uhzna Bcgvbaf"
%
Jr zhfg erfcrpg gur bgure sryybj'f eryvtvba, ohg bayl va gur frafr naq gb
gur rkgrag gung jr erfcrpg uvf gurbel gung uvf jvsr vf ornhgvshy naq uvf
puvyqera fzneg.
		-- U.Y. Zrapxra, "Zvabevgl Ercbeg"
%
"Jryy, jr'ir pbzr shyy pvepyr, Ybeq; V'q yvxr gb guvax gurer'f fbzr
uvture zrnavat gb nyy guvf.  Vg jbhyq pregnvayl ersyrpg jryy ba lbh."
%
Jryy, lbh frr gurer jnf guvf arvtuobeubbq gung unq n cevrfg, n zvavfgre, naq
n enoov jub yvirq arne rnpu bgure.  Bar fhzzre nsgreabba gur cevrfg jrag bhg
naq obhtug uvzfrys n arj pne, naq gur zvavfgre naq enoov, abg gb or bhgqbar,
qvq gur fnzr.
	Gur arkg qnl gur cevrfg jrag bhg naq oyrffrq uvf pne.  Gur zvavfgre
uverq n penar naq oncgvmrq uvf pne va n fjvzzvat cbby.  Gur enoov, nsgre
guvaxvat frevbhfyl sbe n ovg, tbg n unpxfnj naq phg guerr vapurf bss gur raq
bs gur gnvy cvcr.
%
	"Jung ner lbh qbvat?"
	"Rknzvavat gur jbeyq'f znwbe eryvtvbaf.  V'z ybbxvat sbe fbzrguvat
gung'f yvtug ba zbenyf, unf ybgf bs ubyvqnlf, naq jvgu n fubeg vavgvngvba
crevbq."
%
Jung tbbq vf univat fbzrbar jub pna jnyx ba jngre vs lbh qba'g sbyybj
va uvf sbbgfgrcf?
%
Jung vs gurer unq orra ebbz ng gur vaa?
		-- Yvaqn Srfgn ba gur bevtvaf bs Puevfgvnavgl
%
Jung vf tbbq?  Rirelguvat gung urvtugraf gur srryvat bs cbjre va zna, gur
jvyy gb cbjre, cbjre vgfrys.  Jung vf onq?  Rirelguvat gung vf obea bs
jrnxarff.  Abg pbagragrqarff ohg zber cbjre; abg crnpr ohg jne; abg iveghr
ohg svgarff.  Gur jrnx naq gur snvyherf funyy crevfu: svefg cevapvcyr bs
bhe ybir bs zna.  Naq gurl funyy rira or tvira rirel cbffvoyr nffvfgnapr.
Jung vf zber unezshy guna nal ivpr?  Npgvir cvgl sbe nyy gur snvyherf naq
nyy gur jrnx: Puevfgvnavgl.
		-- Sevrqevpu Avrgmfpur
%
	"Jung gur uryy ner lbh trggvat fb hcfrg nobhg?  V gubhtug lbh qvqa'g
oryvrir va Tbq."
	"V qba'g," fur fboorq, ohefgvat ivbyragyl vagb grnef, "ohg gur Tbq V
qba'g oryvrir va vf n tbbq Tbq, n whfg Tbq, n zrepvshy Tbq.  Ur'f abg gur
zrna naq fghcvq Tbq lbh znxr Uvz bhg gb or."
		-- Wbfrcu Uryyre, "Pngpu-22"
%
Jura Pguhyuh pnyyf, Ur pnyyf pbyyrpg!
%
Jura fbzrobql cebgrfgrq ng [Cbcr Nyrknaqre IV'f] jubyrfnyr qvfgevohgvba bs
cneqbaf sbe gur zbfg urvabhf pevzrf -- bar bs juvpu vapyhqrq gur zheqre bs
n qnhtugre ol gur sngure -- ur ergbegrq rnfvyl, "Vg vf abg Tbq'f jvyy gung
n fvaare fubhyq qvr, ohg gung ur fubhyq yvir -- naq cnl."
		-- R.E. Punzoreyva, "Gur Onq Cbcrf"

Whqnf fbyq Puevfg sbe 30 qranev, guvf zna [Cbcr Nyrknaqre IV] jbhyq fryy
uvz sbe 29.
		-- Bggnivnab Honyqvav, punzoreynva gb Cbcr Nyrknaqre IV
%
Jul nggnpx Tbq?  Ur znl or nf zvfrenoyr nf jr ner.
		-- Revx Fngvr
%
Jul V nz na ngurvfg:

1. Ngurvfgf qb abg oryvrir va uvture cbjref.
2. Tbq vf gur uvturfg cbjre.
3. Gurersber, Tbq zhfg or na ngurvfg.
4. Jr fubhyq nyy fgevir gb or yvxr Tbq.
5. Jr fubhyq nyy or ngurvfgf.
%
Jul, jura ab ubarfg zna jvyy qral va cevingr gung rirel hygvzngr ceboyrz vf
jenccrq va gur cebsbhaqrfg zlfgrel, qb ubarfg zra cebpynvz va chycvgf gung
haurfvgngvat pregnvagl vf gur qhgl bs gur zbfg sbbyvfu naq vtabenag?  Vf vg
abg n fcrpgnpyr gb znxr gur natryf ynhtu?  Jr ner n pbzcnal bs vtabenag
orvatf, srryvat bhe jnl guebhtu zvfgf naq qnexarff, yrneavat bayl or
vaprffnagyl ercrngrq oyhaqref, bognvavat n tyvzzrevat bs gehgu ol snyyvat
vagb rirel pbaprvinoyr reebe, qvzyl qvfpreavat yvtug rabhtu sbe bhe qnvyl
arrqf, ohg ubcryrffyl qvssrevat jurarire jr nggrzcg gb qrfpevor gur hygvzngr
bevtva be raq bs bhe cnguf; naq lrg, jura bar bs hf iragherf gb qrpyner gung
jr qba'g xabj gur znc bs gur havirefr nf jryy nf gur znc bs bhe vasvagrfvzny
cnevfu, ur vf ubbgrq, erivyrq, naq creuncf gbyq gung ur jvyy or qnzarq gb nyy
rgreavgl sbe uvf snvguyrffarff.
		-- Yrfyvr Fgrcura, "Na Ntabfgvp'f Ncbybtl",
		   Sbegavtugyl Erivrj, 1876
%
Lrnu, Tbq vf qrnq, ur ynhturq uvzfrys gb qrngu.
%
	"Lbh yvggyr (fhpu n bar jub, juvyr jrnevat n pbccre abfr evat,
fgnaqf va n sbbgongu ngbc Zbhag Enehnehnun qhevat n urnil guhaqrefgbez naq
fubhgf gung Nybuhen, Tbqqrff bs Yvtugavat, unf gur snpvny srngherf bs n
qvfrnfrq hybehnun ebbg)!"
		-- Greel Cengpurgg, "Gur Pbybhe bs Zntvp"
%
Lbhe punaprf bs trggvat uvg ol yvtugavat tb hc vs lbh fgnaq haqre n gerr,
funxr lbhe svfg ng gur fxl, naq fnl, "Fgbezf fhpx!"
		-- Wbuaal Pnefba
%
