(10) Abg rirelobql ybbxf tbbq anxrq.
 (9) Wbr Tnentvbyn jnf n uryy bs na rzprr.
 (8) Wbr Pbpxre ernyyl fubhyq fgvpx jvgu qrpnssrvangrq pbssrr.
 (7) Sevatr!  Sevatr!  Sevatr!
 (6) Vs lbh'ir tbg 72 ubhef gb xvyy, lbh pna cebonoyl svaq ebbz sbe Fun An An.
 (5) Arire nggraq na rirag jvgu n 50,000 gb 1 crefba gb Cbeg-N-Fna engvb.
 (4) Oryyobggbzf jvyy arire tb bhg bs fglyr.
 (3) N qehz fbyb pnaabg or gbb ybat.
 (2) V, Qnivq Yrggrezna, jvyy arire erag bhg zl snez ntnva.
 (1) Jr ner fgneqhfg.  Jr ner tbyqra.  Jr ner tbvat gb ybbx ernyyl fghcvq gb
	shgher trarengvbaf.
		-- Qnivq Yrggrezna, Gbc Gra Yrffbaf bs Jbbqfgbpx
%
N one cngeba erghearq sebz gur zra'f ebbz tehzoyvat gb uvzfrys.
	"Jung'f gur gebhoyr, ohqql?" gur onegraqre vadhverq.
	"Lbh tbg Wbua Jnlar gbvyrg cncre va gurer!"
	"Jung qb lbh zrna?" gur onexrrcre nfxrq.
	"Vg'f ebhtu, vg'f gbhtu, naq vg qbrfa'g gnxr fuvg sebz abobql."
%
N orne naq n enoovg ner gnxvat n penc va gur jbbqf.  Gur orne ybbxf
bire ng gur enoovg naq nfxf, "Fnl, qbrf fuvg rire fgvpx gb lbhe she?"
	"Ab."
Fb gur orne jvcrq uvf nff jvgu gur enoovg.
%
N tenqr fpubby grnpure, jub jnf qbvat n havg ba Jbeyq Jne VV urneq gung
gur sngure bs bar bs ure fghqragf unq orra n svtugre cvybg qhevat gur jne
jvgu bar bs gur Fpnaqvanivna Nve Sbeprf.  Fur vaivgrq uvz gb pbzr va naq
fcrnx gb gur pynff.  Gur thl jnf zber guna unccl gb gnyx, naq ortna jvgu
n fgbel nobhg n zbeavat cngeby jurer ur unq orra arneyl fubg qbja.
	"Jr unq orra hc sbe nobhg 20 zvahgrf sylvat bire rarzl uryq
greevgbel, jura jr abgvprq, whfg va gvzr, 3 sbxxref qvivat ba hf sebz nobir."
Ng gur svefg zragvba bs `sbxxref' gur pynff tvttyrq n yvggyr ovg.
	"Bhe tebhc oebxr sbezngvba, naq ortna gur qbt-svtugvat.  Nf jr
sbhtug, jr abgvprq 2 zber sbxxref pbzvat ng hf sebz nobir naq 2 zber
sbxxref, serfu sebz gur ynaqvat svryq, pbzr gb wbva gur onggyr".
Ng guvf frpbaq naq guveq zragvba bs `sbxxref' gur pynff jnf nyzbfg ynhtuvat
bcrayl, naq gur grnpure vagreehcgrq gur fgbel gb nfx gur cvybg gb rkcynva
gb gur pynff gung n 'sbxxre' jnf n cnegvphyne glcr bs cynar sybja ol gur
Trezna Nve Sbepr.
	Ur ercyvrq, "Ln, qng vf gehr, ohg gurfr sbxxref jrer Zrffrefpuzvqgf".
%
	N zna pnzr ubzr sebz jbex naq nf ur ragrerq gur ubhfr ur lryyrq,
"Uv, ubarl, V'z ubzr."
	Gurer jnf ab erfcbafr.  Ur jnyxrq guebhtu gur ubhfr naq fnj n abgr
ba gur ersevtrengbe. Vg ernq "V'z bhg jvgu gur tveyf naq V'yy or ubzr nobhg
8.  Rvgure svk lbhefrys fbzrguvat gb rng, be jnvg sbe zr naq jr'yy rng jura
V trg ubzr."
	Jryy, ur qrpvqrq gb jnvg hagvy uvf jvsr erghearq.  Ubjrire, uvf
fgbznpu fgnegrq gb tebjy naq ur erzrzorerq gung ur unq na nccyr yrsg bire
sebz uvf yhapu.  Ur tbg gur nccyr, cbyvfurq vg n yvggyr, naq urneq gur
qbbeoryy evat.  Ur jrag gb gur qbbe naq gurer fgbbq n yvggyr oybaq unverq
tvey ubyqvat bhg n yvggyr cncre ont.  "Gevpx be gerng", fur fnvq.
	Ur ybbxrq ng gur tvey, ybbxrq ng gur nccyr, gubhtug ubj uhatel ur
jnf, ybbxrq ng gur tvey ntnva, naq jvgu n fyvtug fvtu qebccrq uvf nccyr va
gur ont.  Gur yvggyr tvey ybbxrq qbja va gur ont, ybbxrq hc ntnva, naq
pbzcynvarq, "Lbh fghcvq fba-bs-n-ovgpu.  Lbh oebxr zl pbbxvrf!"
%
N ahpyrne snzvyl vf bhg tbysvat bar qnl, jura vg orpbzrf pyrne gung Qnq vfa'g
tbvat gb jva nal gebcuvrf, ng yrnfg ba guvf pbhefr.  Ba gur 3eq ubyr, nsgre
gjb zvfrenoyr obtvrf, ur zvffrf n gjb sbbg chgg naq rkpynvzf, "Fuvg!"
	Uvf jvsr tynaprf bire ng gurve fvkgrra lrne byq qnhtugre naq fnlf
abguvat.
	Ba gur sbhegu ubyr Qnq grrf bss jvgu na vaperqvoyr ubbx, naq, nsgre
gur varivgnoyr rkpynzngvba, uvf jvsr ercebirf uvz jvgu "Ubarl!"
	Guvf pbagvahrf ba, jvgu uvf tbysvat trggvat jbefr naq uvf jvsr trggvat
zber naq zber hcfrg nobhg uvf ynathntr.  Svanyyl, ba gur 17gu ubyr, ur ntnva
zvffrf n irel rnfl chgg.  Syvatvat uvf pyho qbja, ur phefrf gur ubyr, gur
pyho, naq gur fhafrg, hfvat gur jbeq "shpx" sbe gur svefg gvzr.  Uvf jvsr
juveyf nebhaq naq pevrf, "Ubarl!  Bhe qnhtugre vf fgnaqvat evtug arkg gb lbh!"
	Srryvat erzbefrshy, ohg fbzrjung qrsrafvir, ur gheaf gb gur
qnhtugre naq fnlf, "Jryy, Pvaql, lbh'ir urneq gung jbeq orsber, unira'g
lbh?"
	"Lrf," gur qnhtugre ercyvrf, "ohg arire va natre."
%
N ergverq fpubbygrnpure svanyyl qrpvqrq gung fur jnf gverq bs yvivat nybar
naq jnagrq fbzr pbzcnavbafuvc, fb nsgre n tbbq qrny bs gubhtug fur qrpvqrq
gb ivfvg gur ybpny crg fubc.  Gur bjare fhttrfgrq n cneebg, jvgu juvpu fur
pbhyq pbaqhpg n pvivyvmrq pbairefngvba.  Guvf frrzrq gb or na rkpryyrag
vqrn, fb fur obhtug n unaqfbzr cneebg, fng uvz ba n crepu va ure yvivat ebbz,
naq fnvq, "Fnl 'Cerggl obl.'"  Fvyrapr sebz gur oveq.  "Pbzr ba abj, fnl
'Cerggl obl ... cerggl obl.'"
	Ng ybat ynfg, qvfthfgrqyl, gur oveq fnvq, "Bu, fuvg."
	Fubpxrq, gur fpubbygrnpure fnvq, "Whfg sbe gung, lbh trg svir zvahgrf
va gur ersevtrengbe."  Svir zvahgrf yngre fur chg gur fuvirevat oveq onpx ba
vgf crepu naq fnvq, "Abj yrg'f urne vg: 'Cerggl obl ... cerggl obl.'"
	"Qnza vg, jbhyqwn ynl bss, ynql?" fnvq gur cneebg.
	Bhgentrq, gur jbzna tenoorq gur oveq, fnvq, "Gung'f vg!  Gra zvahgrf
va gur serrmre," naq fynzzrq gur qbbe ba uvz.
	Ubccvat nobhg gb xrrc jnez, jung qbrf gur cneebg pbzr npebff ohg n
ovt sebmra ghexrl jnvgvat sbe Gunaxftvivat.  Fgnegyrq, ur fdhnjxf, "Zl Tbq,
lbh zhfg unir gbyq gur ovgpu gb tb shpx urefrys!"
%
N inphhz vf n uryy bs n ybg orggre guna fbzr bs gur fghss gung angher
ercynprf vg jvgu.
		-- Graarffrr Jvyyvnzf
%
N lbhat Arj Lbex ubhfrjvsr jnf fubpxrq ol fbzr bs gur ynathntr hfrq ol ure
qnhtugre.  Jura nfxrq nobhg vg, gur qnhtugre fnvq fur unq yrnearq vg sebz
n fznyy tvey fur cynlrq jvgu va gur cnex.  Gur arkg qnl, gur zbgure fbhtug
bhg gur yvggyr tvey nf fur cynlrq va gur cnex.  "Ner lbh gur yvggyr tvey
jub hfrf onq jbeqf?"
	"Jub gbyq lbh?"
	"N yvggyr oveq," nafjrerq gur zbgure.
	"Jryy, V yvxr gung!" rkpynvzrq gur fznyy tvey.  "Naq V'ir orra
srrqvat gur yvggyr onfgneqf, gbb!"
%
Nsgre znxvat n qnevat rfpncr sebz gur cravgragvnel, gur pbaivpg ryhqrq
oybbqubhaqf naq cbyvpr ebnqoybpxf naq qbqtrq uryvpbcgre frnepuyvtugf ba
uvf jnl gb frr uvf jvsr.  Svanyyl farnxvat va gur onpx ragenapr, ur xabpxrq
ba gur qbbe naq fzvyrq gevhzcunagyl nf fur bcrarq vg.  "Jurer gur uryy unir
lbh orra?" fur oynerq.  "Lbh ohfgrq bhg zber guna fvk ubhef ntb!"
%
Nf arne nf V pna gryy, lbh'er abg nal penmvre guna gur nirentr nffubyr
ba gur fgerrg.
		-- E.C. ZpZhecul, "Bar Syrj Bire gur Phpxbb'f Arfg"
%
Nf gurl fnl nobhg Qhatrbaf naq Qentbaf, "Yvsr'f n qvr, naq gura lbh ovgpu."
%
Nfx lbhe obff gb erpbafvqre --

Vg'f fb qvssvphyg gb gnxr "Tb gb uryy" sbe na nafjre.
%
	Ng uvf fragrapvat, Ureovr Fcreyvat cebirq gung ur jnf gur nyy-gvzr
fgnaq-hc thl.
	Fcreyvat'f ynjlre znqr n yratgul, vzcnffvbarq cyrn sbe uvf pyvrag.
Ur gnyxrq bs zrepl, whfgvpr, uhznavgl gb sryybj zra jub unir pubfra gur jebat
cngu.  Lrf, gur pevzrf jrer frevbhf, lrf, Ze. Fcreyvat qrfreirf n cevfba
fragrapr, ohg gur znkvzhz fragrapr jnf abg jneenagrq.
	Gura gur whqtr ghearq gb Fcreyvat.  "Ze. Fcreyvat, vf gurer nalguvat
lbh jvfu gb fnl?"
	"Lrf, Lbhe Ubabe.  Vs lbh guvax V'z tbvat gb ort sbe zrepl, lbh'ir
tbg nabgure guvax pbzvat.  Lbh'er nyy n ohapu bs shpxvat snfpvfg pbpxfhpxref,
lbh pna nyy tb gb uryy, shpx lbh, shpx lbh, shpx lbh..."
		-- Tertbel Jnyynpr, "Cncn'f Tnzr"
%
Orra guebhtu uryy?

Jung qvq lbh oevat onpx sbe zr?
%
Orggre n fvfgre va n juberubhfr guna n oebgure ba n Ubaqn.
%
Oybj vg bhg lbhe nff!
%
Pnyy guvatf ol gurve evtug anzrf...  Tynff bs oenaql naq jngre!  Gung vf gur
pheerag ohg abg gur nccebcevngr anzr: nfx sbe n tynff bs sver naq qvfgvyyrq
qnzangvba.
		-- Eboreg Unyy, va Byvaguhf Tertbel'f, "Oevrs Zrzbve bs gur
		   Yvsr bs Unyy"

	[Dhbgrq va "IZF Vagreanyf naq Qngn Fgehpgherf", I4.4, jura
	 ersreevat gb ybtvpny anzrf.]
%
Puhepuvyy jnf xabja gb qenva n tynff be gjb naq, nsgre bar
cnegvphyneyl pbaivivny riravat, ur punaprq gb rapbhagre Zvff Orffvr Oenqqbpx,
n Fbpvnyvfg zrzore bs gur Ubhfr bs Pbzzbaf, jub, hcba frrvat uvf pbaqvgvba,
fnvq, "Jvafgba, lbh'er qehax."  Zhfgrevat nyy uvf qvtavgl, Puhepuvyy qerj
uvzfrys hc gb uvf shyy urvtug, pbpxrq na rlroebj naq erwbvarq, "Fubir vg hc
lbhe nff, lbh htyl phag."
	Jura gur abgrq cynljevtug Trbetr Oreaneq Funj frag uvz gjb gvpxrgf gb
gur bcravat avtug bs uvf arj cynl jvgu n abgr gung ernq: "Oevat n sevraq, vs
lbh unir bar," Puhepuvyy, abg gb or bhgqbar, cebzcgyl jverq onpx: "Lbh naq
lbhe cynl pna tb shpx lbhefryirf."
	Ng na ryrtnag qvaare cnegl, Ynql Nfgbe bapr yrnarq npebff gur gnoyr
gb erznex, "Vs lbh jrer zl uhfonaq, Jvafgba, V'q cbvfba lbhe pbssrr."  "Naq
vs lbh jrer zl jvsr, V'q orng gur fuvg bhg bs lbh," pnzr Puhepuvyy'f
haurfvgngvat ergbeg.
		-- "Gur Puhepuvyy Jvg", Angvbany Ynzcbba
%
Pbashpvhf fnl gbb qnza zhpu!
%
"Qnqql?"

"Lrf fba."

"Jun-jun-jun-jung qbrf erterg zrna?"

"Jryy, fba, n shaal guvat nobhg erterg vf gung vg'f orggre gb erterg
fbzrguvat lbh unir qbar, guna gb erterg fbzrguvat lbh unira'g qbar.  Naq
ol gur jnl, vs lbh frr lbhe Zbz guvf jrrxraq, jbhyq or lbh fher naq gryy
ure, `FNGNA, FNGNA, FNGNA!!!'"
		-- Ohggubyr Fhesref, "Fjrng Ybns"
%
"Qnzzvg, zna, gung'f hacebsrffvbany!  N tbbq onegraqre ynhtuf naljnl!"
%
Qnza oenprf.
		-- Jvyyvnz Oynxr, "Cebireof bs Uryy"
%
QNZA VG, V TBGGN TRG BHGGN URER!
%
Qnza, V arrq n Pbxr!
		-- Qe. Jvyyvnz QrIevrf
		[nsgre vzcynagvat gur svefg negvsvpvny uhzna urneg]
%
"Qba'g pbzr onpx hagvy lbh unir uvz", gur Gvpx-Gbpx Zna fnvq dhvrgyl,
fvapreryl, rkgerzryl qnatrebhfyl.

Gurl hfrq qbtf.  Gurl hfrq ceborf.  Gurl hfrq pneqvb cyngr pebffbssf.
Gurl hfrq grrcref.  Gurl hfrq oevorel.  Gurl hfrq fgvpx gvgrf.  Gurl hfrq
vagvzvqngvba.  Gurl hfrq gbezrag.  Gurl hfrq gbegher.  Gurl hfrq svaxf.
Gurl hfrq pbcf.  Gurl hfrq frnepu naq frvmher.  Gurl hfrq snyyneba.  Gurl
hfrq orggrezrag vapragvirf.  Gurl hfrq svatre cevagf.  Gurl hfrq gur
oregvyyvba flfgrz.  Gurl hfrq phaavat.  Gurl hfrq thvyr.  Gurl hfrq gernpurel.
Gurl hfrq Enbhy-Zvgtbat ohg ur jnfa'g zhpu uryc.  Gurl hfrq nccyvrq culfvpf.
Gurl hfrq grpuavdhrf bs pevzvabybtl.  Naq jung gur uryy, gurl pnhtug uvz.
		-- Uneyna Ryyvfba, "Ercrag, Uneyrdhva, fnvq gur Gvpx-Gbpx Zna"
%
Qba'g whfg rng n unzohetre; rng gur URYY bhg bs vg.
		-- W.E. "Obo" Qboof
%
QEBC GUR QNZA ORNE!!!
		-- Gur Nqiraghere
%
Qhevat gur qnexrfg qnlf bs Jbeyq Jne VV, jura rnpu avtug oebhtug jnirf bs
Yhsgjnssr obzoref envavat qrngu naq qrfgehpgvba ba n arne-qrsrafryrff Ybaqba,
Cevzr Zvavfgre Puhepuvyy jrag ba gur nve gb nqqerff gur Oevgvfu crbcyr.  "V
ernq guvf zbeavat'f cncre gung Uree Uvgyre cynaf gb jevat Ratynaq'f arpx yvxr
gung bs n puvpxra," ur ortna, "naq V jnf erzvaqrq bs jung gur Vevfu cbnpure
fnvq nf ur fgbbq ba gur tnyybjf.  Vg frrzf gur cbbe sryybj jnf nccebnpurq ol n
jryy-zrnavat vs fbzrjung biremrnybhf cevrfg jub, va ubeevsvp qrgnvy, qrfpevorq
gur hasnqvat gbezragf bs Unqrf juvpu njnvgrq uvz vs ur qvq abg ercrag bs uvf
zvfqrrqf. Gur pbaqrzarq zna yvfgrarq cngvragyl gb nyy gung gur cevrfg unq gb
fnl, naq jura ur jnf qbar, tevaarq oebnqyl naq ercyvrq, 'Rng vg enj, shmm
ahgf.'"
		-- "Gur Puhepuvyy Jvg", Angvbany Ynzcbba
%
Rneyl gb orq naq rneyl gb evfr znxrf n zna n uryyhin ovt ahvfnapr.
%
Rng fuvg naq qvr n ivetva!
%
Rtbgvfz vf gur narfgurgvp tvira ol n xvaqyl angher gb eryvrir gur cnva
bs orvat n qnzarq sbby.
		-- Oryynzl Oebbxf
%
Rirel zbeavat, gur pebjq ba Pbarl Vfynaq ornpu jnf fgnegyrq gb frr 
n wbttre jvgu gur ohvyq bs n ceb sbbgonyy cynlre ohg n urnq gur fvmr bs n 
onfronyy.  Svanyyl, fbzr oenir lbhat zna tbg hc gur areir gb fgbc uvz naq
nfx, "Jung unccrarq gb tvir lbh fhpu n fznyy urnq?"
	Gur wbttre fnqyl gbyq gur fgbel bs svaqvat n zntvp ynzc ba gur ornpu, 
juvpu cebqhprq n ornhgvshy travr jura ehoorq.  Gur travr fnvq, "V abj tvir
lbh bar jvfu.  Qb lbh jnag n dhvpx shpx be n yvggyr urnq?"
%
Svr sbe funzr, lbh ynfpvivbhf, yrjq, yrpurebhf, yvovqvabhf, yhfgshy,
yvpragvbhf, qvegl ohz!!
%
Svt Arjgba.
%
Sbyxf, jung pna V gryy lbh nobhg zl arkg thrfg.  Guvf png nyybjrq uvzfrys
gb or nqberq, ohg abg ybirq. Naq uvf fhpprff va fubj ohfvarff jnf zngpurq
ol snvyher va uvf crefbany eryngvbafuvc ont, abj gung'f jurer ur ernyyl
obzorq.  Naq ur pnzr gb oryvrir gung jbex, fubj ohfvarff, ybir, uvf jubyr
yvsr, rira uvzfrys naq nyy gung wnmm jnf ohyyfuvg.  Ur orpnzr ahzreb hab
tnzrcynlre.  Hu, gb gur cbvag jurer ur qvqa'g xabj jurer gur tnzrf raqrq
naq gur ernyvgl ortna.  Yvxr gb guvf png, gur bayl ernyvgl... vf qrngu, zna.
Ynqvrf naq tragyrzra, yrg zr ynl ba lbh, n fb-fb ragregnvare, abg zhpu bs
n uhznavgnevna, naq guvf png jnf arire abobql'f sevraq.  Va uvf svany
nccrnenapr ba gur terng fgntr bs yvsr, hu, lbh pna nccynhq vs lbh jnag gb,
Ze. Wbr Tvqrba!!
		-- Nyy Gung Wnmm
%
Shpx neg; yrg'f qnapr!
%
Shpx bss naq qvr!
%
Shpx lbh naq nalobql jub ybbxf yvxr lbh.
%
Shpx'rz vs gurl pna'g gnxr n wbxr!
%
TRG BSS GUR SHPXVAT FLFGRZ GUVF VAFGNAG, LBH NFFUBYR!!!!
%
Trg lbhe olgrf sebz bhe onpxraq!
		-- Oevggba Yrr
%
Trggvat na rqhpngvba ng gur Havirefvgl bs Pnyvsbeavn vf yvxr univat
$50.00 fubirq hc lbhe nff, n avpxry ng n gvzr.
%
Tvir zr gur Yhkhevrf, naq gur Uryy jvgu gur Arprffvgvrf!
%
Tenva tebjf orfg va fuvg.
		-- Hefhyn X. YrThva
%
Tenivgl vf n zlgu, gur Rnegu fhpxf.
%
Tenivgl vf na hasbetvivat zbgureshpxre.
%
Uneqyl n cher fpvrapr, uvfgbel vf pybfre gb navzny uhfonaqel guna vg vf gb
zngurzngvpf, va gung vg vaibyirf fryrpgvir oerrqvat.  Gur cevapvcny qvssrerapr
orgjrra gur uhfonaqelzna naq gur uvfgbevna vf gung gur sbezre oerrqf furrc
be pbjf be fhpu, naq gur ynggre oerrqf (nffhzrq) snpgf.  Gur uhfonaqelzna hfrf
uvf fxvyyf gb raevpu gur shgher; gur uvfgbevna hfrf uvf gb raevpu gur cnfg.
Obgu ner hfhnyyl hc gb gurve naxyrf va ohyyfuvg.
		-- Gbz Eboovaf
%
Unir lbh rire zrg n zna bs tbbq punenpgre jurer jbzra ner pbaprearq?

Jryy, V unira'g.  V svaq gung jurarire n jbzna orpbzrf sevraqf jvgu zr,
fur orpbzrf wrnybhf, rknpgvat, fhfcvpvbhf, naq n qnza ahvfnapr; naq
jurarire V orpbzr sevraqf jvgu n jbzna, V orpbzr frysvfu naq glenaavpny.
Fb urer V nz, Cvpxrevat, n pbasvezrq byq onpurybe naq irel yvxryl gb
erznva fb.
		-- Urael Uvttvaf, "Zl Snve Ynql"
%
Unir lbh rire jbaqrerq jung znxrf Pnyvsbeavnaf fb pnyz?  Orfvqrf qehtf, V
zrna.  Gur nafjre vf ubg ghof.  N ubg gho vf n erqjbbq pbagnvare svyyrq jvgu
jngre gung lbh fvg va anxrq jvgu zrzoref bs gur bccbfvgr frk, abar bs jubz
vf arprffnevyl lbhe fcbhfr.  Nsgre n srj ubhef va gurve ubg ghof,
Pnyvsbeavnaf qba'g tvir n qnza nobhg rnegudhnxrf be znff zheqreref.  Gurl
qba'g tvir n qnza nobhg nalguvat , juvpu vf jul gurl ner noyr gb cebqhpr
"Ynirear naq Fuveyrl" jrrx nsgre jrrx.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Gnzvat bs gur Fperj"
%
Ur jub urfvgngrf vf n qnzarq sbby.
		-- Znr Jrfg
%
Ur jub genvaf uvf gbathr gb dhbgr gur yrnearq  fntrf, jvyy or xabja sne
naq jvqr nf n fzneg nff.
		-- Ubjneq Xnaqry
%
"Ur'f abg cvavat, ur'f cnffrq ba!  Guvf cneebg jba'g fdhnjx!  Ur'f
prnfrq gb or!  Ur'f rkcverq, naq tbar gb zrrg uvf znxre!  Vg'f n
fgvss!  Ab oerngu bs yvsr, ur znl erfg va crnpr!  Vs lbh unqa'g anvyrq
uvz gb gur crepu, ur'q or chfuvat hc gur qnvfvrf!  Ur'f bss gur gjvt!
Ur'f xvpxrq gur ohpxrg!  Ur'f pheyrq hc uvf gbbgvrf!  Ur'f fuhssyrq bss
guvf zbegny jbeyq!  Ur'f eha qbja gur phegnva, naq wbvarq gur oyrrq'a
Pubve Vaivapvoyr!  UR'F SHPXVAT FAHSSRQ VG!  Ivf-n-iv uvf zrgnobyvp
cebprffrf vf urnq vf ybfg.  Nyy fgngrzragf pbapreavat guvf cneebg vf ab
ybatre n tbvat pbaprea, nsgre sebz abj ba, Vabcrengvir...

		GUVF VF NA RK-CNEEBG!!
%
Uryy'f oebxra ybbfr.
		-- Eboreg Terrar
%
Uryy, vs lbh qba'g gel gb erznxr fbzrbar, ubj ner gurl fhccbfrq gb xabj
lbh pner?
%
Urer vf gur ceboyrz: sbe znal lrnef, gur Fhcerzr Pbheg jerfgyrq jvgu gur vffhr
bs cbeabtencul, hagvy svanyyl Nffbpvngr Whfgvpr Wbua Cnhy Fgriraf pnzr hc jvgu
gur snzbhf dhbgngvba nobhg ubj ur pbhyqa'g qrsvar cbeabtencul, ohg ur xarj vg
jura ur fnj vg.  Fb sbe n juvyr, gur pbheg'f cbyvpl jnf gb unir nyy gur
fhfcrpgrq cbeabtencul gehpxrq gb Whfgvpr Fgriraf' ubhfr, jurer ur jbhyq ybbx vg
bire.  "Abcr, guvf vfa'g vg," ur'q fnl.  "Oevat fbzr zber."  Guvf jrag ba hagvy
bar zbeavat jura uvf ubhfrxrrcre sbhaq uvz genccrq va gur erperngvba ebbz haqre
na rabezbhf zbhaq bs ehoorevmrq vzcyrzragf, naq gur pbheg unq gb vffhr n ehyvat
fgngvat gung vg qvqa'g xabj jung gur uryy cbeabtencul jnf rkprcg gung vg jnf
vyyrtny naq rirelobql fubhyq fgbc onqtrevat gur pbheg nobhg vg orpnhfr gur
pbheg jnf tbvat gb gnxr n anc. 
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Cbeabtencul"
%
Ubefrpenc, yvggyr oebgure.  Gurer'f nyjnlf fbzrguvat zber gb or qbar.
Nabgure cnyz gb or ternfrq.  Nabgure onpx gb or fpengpurq.  Nabgure
jrnx fvfgre gb or fuberq hc.
		-- W.E. Rjvat
%
Ubjneq Pbfryy'f ovttrfg cebgehfvba vf uvf nffubyr.
		-- Wbua Inyol
%
V nz snveyl haercragnag nobhg ure cbrgel.  V ernyyl guvax gung guerr dhnegref
bs vg vf tvoorevfu.  Ubjrire, V zhfg pehfu qbja gurfr gubhtugf bgurejvfr gur
qbir bs crnpr jvyy fuvg ba zr.
		-- Abry Pbjneq ba Rqvgu Fvgjryy
%
V pnzr; V fnj; V shpxrq hc.
%
V pna'g dhvgr chg zl svatre ba vg, ohg fbzrguvat nobhg lbh cvffrf zr bss.
		-- Crgre Xavtug
%
	V qvfnccebir bs gur S-jbeq, abg orpnhfr vg'f qvegl, ohg orpnhfr jr
hfr vg nf n fhofgvghgr sbe gubhtugshy vafhygf, naq vg serdhragyl yrnqf gb
ivbyrapr.  Jung jr bhtug gb qb, jura jr natre rnpu bgure, fnl, va genssvp,
vf rkpunatr cubar ahzoref, fb gung yngre ba, jura jr'ir unq gvzr gb guvax
bs jvggl naq yrnearq vafhygf be ybbx gurz hc va gur yvoenel, jr pbhyq pnyy
rnpu bgure hc:
     Lbh: Uryyb?  Obo?
     Obo: Lrf?
     Lbh: Guvf vf Rq.  Erzrzore?  Gur crefba jubfr cnexvat fcnpr lbh
          gbbx ynfg Guhefqnl?  Bhgfvqr bs Frnef?
     Obo: Bu lrf!  Fher!  Ubj ner lbh, Rq?
     Lbh: Svar, gunaxf.  Yvfgra, Obo, gur ernfba V'z pnyyvat vf:
	  "Znqnz, lbh znl or qehax, ohg V nz htyl, naq ..."  Ab, jnvg.
	  V zrna:  "lbh znl or htyl, ohg V nz Jvafgba Puhepuvyy
	  naq ..."  Ab, jnvg.  (Fbhaq bs ersrerapr obbx guhqqvat bagb
	  gur sybbe.)  F-jbeq.  Rkphfr zr.  Ybbx, Obo, V'z tbvat gb
	  unir gb trg onpx gb lbh.
     Obo: Svar.
		-- Qnir Oneel, "$#$%#^%!^%&@%@!"
%
V qba'g xabj jul jbzra trg fb hcfrg, gurl unir unys gur zbarl naq nyy gur chffl.
		-- Tnel Ohffl, "QP Pno"
%
V qba'g ybir lbh, nffubyr, V ybir lbhe qnhtugre.
		-- Gur Haqretenqhngr
%
"V unq gb prafbe rirelguvat zl fbaf jngpurq ... rira ba gur Znel Glyre
Zbber fubj V urneq gur jbeq 'qnza'!"
		-- Znel Ybh Onk
%
V ybir guvf shpxvat Havirefvgl, naq guvf Havirefvgl ybirf shpxvat zr.
%
V cynlrq bire gur zhfvp bs gung fpbhaqery Oenuzf.  Jung n tvsgyrff
onfgneq!  Vg naablf zr gung guvf frys-vasyngrq zrqvbpevgl vf unvyrq
nf n travhf.  Jul, va pbzcnevfba jvgu uvz, Evss vf n travhf.
		-- Gpunvxbifxl, Bpgbore 9, 1886, qvnel ragel
%
V guvax jr pna nyy nterr gung gurer vf abg rabhtu pbzzba pbhegrfl fubja ...
URL!  CNL NGGRAGVBA JURA V'Z GNYXVAT GB LBH QNZZVG!  V fnvq V guvax jr pna
nyy nterr gung gurer vf abg rabhtu pbzzba pbhegrfl fubja gbqnl. Jura jr gnxr
gur gvzr gb or pbhegrbhf gb rnpu bgure, jr svaq gung jr ner unccvre naq yrff
yvxryl gb ratntr va ahpyrne jne.  Guvf cbvag jnf qevira ubzr ol gur erprag
fhzzvg gnyxf, jurer Anapl Erntna naq Envfn Tbeonpuri, rnpu bs jubfr uhfonaq
guvaxf gur bgure'f uhfonaq vf irezva, jrer noyr gb fvg qbja ng n uvtu-yriry
grn naq ratntr va pbhegrbhf pbairefngvba ...
		-- Qnir Oneel, "Gur Fghss bs Rgvdhrggr"
%
V jbhyqa'g zvaq qlvat --

vg'f gung ohfvarff bs univat gb fgnl qrnq gung fpnerf gur fuvg bhg bs zr.
		-- E. Trvf
%
V'q engure or yrq gb uryy guna znantrq gb urnina.
%
V'z fbeel V'z yngr sbyxf, V whfg tbg bhg bs wnvy.  V gevrq gb punatr zl
tveysevraq'f anzr.  Lrnu, V jrag qbja gb gur unyy bs erpbeqf.  V fnvq, "V'q
yvxr gb punatr vg... V'q yvxr gb punatr vg gb... YLVAT YVGGYR OVGPU!"
		-- Fnz Xvavfba
%
V'ir orra jngpuvat lbh pybfryl gb frr vs lbh unir orra tbbq guvf lrne;
naq fvapr lbh unir, V jvyy or gryyvat zl ryirf gb znxr fbzr tbbqvrf sbe zr
gb yrnir haqre lbhe gerr ba Puevfgznf.  V jnf tbvat gb oevat lbh nyy gur
tvsgf sebz gur gjryir qnlf bs Puevfgznf, ohg jr unq n yvggyr ceboyrz hc urer.
Gur gjryir svqqyref svqqyvat unir nyy pbzr qbja jvgu I.Q. sebz svqqyvat jvgu
gur gra ynqvrf qnapvat, gur ryrira ybeqf-n-yrncvat unir xabpxrq hc gur rvtug
znvqf-n-zvyxvat, naq gur avar cvcref cvcvat unir orra neerfgrq sbe qbvat
jrveq guvatf gb gur frira fjnaf-n-fjvzzvat naq gur fvk trrfr-n-ynlvat.  Gur
sbhe pnyyvat oveqf, guerr Serapu uraf, gjb ghegyr qbirf, naq gur cnegevqtr
va gur crne gerr unir zr hc gb zl nff va oveqfuvg.  Ba gbc bs nyy guvf, Zef.
Pynhf vf tbvat guebhtu zrabcnhfr, rvtug bs zl ervaqrre ner va urng, gur ryirf
unir wbvarq tnl yvorengvba, naq gubfr qhzo nff Cbynpxf unir fpurqhyrq
Puevfgznf sbe gur svsgu bs Sroehnel.  V'yy qb jung V pna.
		Fvapreryl,
		Fnagn
%
Vs ng svefg lbh qba'g fhpprrq, gel, gel ntnva.  Gura dhvg.  Ab hfr orvat n
qnza sbby nobhg vg.
		-- J.P. Svryqf

[Nyfb nggevohgrq gb Ebl Zratbg.  Rq.]
%
Vs vg'f abg bar guvat, vg'f n zbgure.
%
Vs yvsr'f n cvrpr bs fuvg, Pnyphyhf VVV vf gur fcbba.
%
Vs gbqnl vf gur svefg qnl bs gur erfg bs lbhe yvsr, jung gur uryy jnf lrfgreqnl?
%
Vs lbh qba'g evqr n pnzry gb jbex, lbh nva'g Furrvgr.
%
	Vs lbh jbex sbe n zna, va urnira'f anzr, jbex sbe uvz.
	Vs ur cnlf lbh jntrf juvpu fhccyl lbh oernq naq ohggre, jbex sbe uvz;
fcrnx jryy bs uvz; fgnaq ol uvz, naq ol gur vafgvghgvba ur ercerfragf.
	Vs chg gb n cvapu, na bhapr bs yblnygl vf jbegu n cbhaq bs pyrirearff.
	Vs lbh zhfg ivyvsl, pbaqrza naq rgreanyyl svaq qvfcnentr -- erfvta lbhe
cbfvgvba, naq jura lbh ner bhgfvqr, qnza gb lbhe urneg'f pbagrag... ohg, nf
ybat nf lbh ner cneg bs gur vafgvghgvba qb abg pbaqrza vg.
	Vs lbh qb gung, lbh ner ybbfravat gur graqevyf gung ner ubyqvat lbh gb
gur vafgvghgvba, naq ng gur svefg uvtu jvaq gung pbzrf nybat, lbh jvyy
or hcebbgrq naq oybja njnl, naq cebonoyl jvyy arire xabj gur ernfba jul.
%
Vs lbh'er tbvat gb oernx hc jvgu lbhe byq ynql naq lbh yvir va n fznyy
gbja, znxr fher lbh qba'g oernx hc ng guerr va gur zbeavat.  Orpnhfr lbh'er
fperjrq -- gurer'f abguvat gb qb ... Fb znxr vg nobhg avar va gur zbeavat,
... ohyyfuvg nebhaq, jbeel ure n yvggyr, gura pbzr onpx ng frira va gur
avtug.
		-- Yraal Oehpr
%
Va gur ortvaavat jnf gur QRZB Cebwrpg.  Naq gur Cebwrpg jnf jvgubhg sbez.
Naq qnexarff jnf hcba gur fgnss zrzoref gurerbs.  Fb gurl fcnxr hagb
gurve Qvivfvba Urnq, fnlvat, "Vg vf n pebpx bs fuvg, naq vg fgvaxf."

Naq gur Qvivfvba Urnq fcnxr hagb uvf Qrcnegzrag Urnq, fnlvat,
"Vg vf n pebpx bs rkperzrag naq abar znl novqr gur bqbe gurerbs."
Abj, gur Qrcnegzrag Urnq fcnxr hagb uvf Qverpgbengr Urnq, fnlvat,
"Vg vf n pbagnvare bs rkperzrag, naq vf irel fgebat, fhpu gung abar
znl novqr orsber vg."  Naq vg pnzr gb cnff gung gur Qverpgbengr Urnq
fcnxr hagb gur Nffvfgnag Grpuavpny Qverpgbe, fnlvat, "Vg vf n irffry
bs sregvyvmre naq abar znl novqr ol vgf fgeratgu."

Naq gur nffvfgnag Grpuavpny Qverpgbe fcnxr guhf hagb gur Grpuavpny
Qverpgbe, fnlvat, "Vg pbagnvargu gung juvpu nvqf tebjgu naq vg vf
irel fgebat."  Naq, Yb, gur Grpuavpny Qverpgbe fcnxr gura hagb gur
Pncgnva, fnlvat, "Gur cbjreshy arj Cebwrpg jvyy uryc cebzbgr gur
tebjgu bs gur Ynobengbevrf."

Naq gur Pncgnva ybbxrq qbja hcba gur Cebwrpg, naq Ur fnj gung vg jnf Tbbq!
%
Vafcvgr bs nyy rivqrapr gb gur pbagenel, gur ragver havirefr vf pbzcbfrq bs
bayl gjb onfvp fhofgnaprf: zntvp naq ohyyfuvg.
%
Vg vf n fnq pbzzragnel ba gbqnl'f fbpvrgl gung guvf sbeghar unf gb or
pynffvsvrq nf "bssrafvir" fvzcyl orpnhfr vg pbagnvaf gur jbeq "shpx".
%
Vg znl abg or shaal, ohg vg'f qnzarq nzhfvat!
%
Vg frrzf gurer jrer gjb lbhat Znevarf jnyxvat qbja gur fgerrg, naq
gurl punaprq hcba n ynql jub jnf obgu irel cebcre naq irel jryy raqbjrq.
Bar bs gurz fnvq, "Jbj! Jung gvgf!  Url ynql, jbhyq V ybir gb fahttyr hc jvgu
gurz sbe njuvyr.  Jung ner lbh qbvat guvf nsgreabba?"

Jryy, gur bgure Znevar gubhtug gung jnf whfg nobhg gur zbfg funzrshy
guvat ur unq rire jvgarffrq, naq sryg gung ur unq gb erfgber gur ubabe bs gur
Pbecf.  "Cneqba zl sevraq, Zn'nz," ur ncbybtvmrq, "Ur'f abg orra irel jryy
oebhtug hc naq qba'g xabj ubj gb gnyx gb phag."
%
Vg hfrq gb or n zna'f jbeyq, naq gur jbzna'f cynpr jnf va gur ubzr.
Gurl pna xvff gung fuvg tbbqolr.
%
Vg jnf nyzbfg pybfvat gvzr jura n znyr cngeba jub unq orra trggvat gur
sebfgl gerngzrag sebz n tvey ng gur raq bs gur one pnyyrq gb gur
onegraqre naq fnvq, "Tvir gung ovgpul qbhpur ont bire gurer bar ba zr."
	"Jr qvfpbhentr gung fbeg bs ynathntr urer, fve," gur onegraqre
nafjrerq fgreayl.
	"BX, BX. Freir gur ynql n pbpxgnvy jvgu zl pbzcyvzragf."
	Gur onegraqre nccebnpurq gur srznyr va dhrfgvba.  "Gur, hu, tragyrzna
ng gur bgure raq bs gur one jbhyq yvxr gb ohl lbh n qevax, zvff.  Jung jbhyq
lbh yvxr?"
	"Ivartne naq jngre."
%
Vg'f n ovg uneq gb ohyyfuvg gur bprna.  Vg'f abg yvfgravat, lbh xabj
jung V zrna.
		-- Qnivq Pebfol
%
Vg'f n ovgpu orvat ohgpu.
%
Vg'f n qnza cbbe zvaq gung pna bayl guvax bs bar jnl gb fcryy n jbeq.
		-- Naqerj Wnpxfba
%
Vg'f orggre gb or cvffrq bss guna cvffrq ba.
%
Vg'f fb shpxva' terng gb or nyvir!
%
Yvsr vf n ovgpu, ohg gur chccvrf pna or phgr.
%
Yvsr vf n fuvg fnaqjvpu, naq rirel qnl lbh trg gb gnxr nabgure ovgr.
Vg'f whfg gung fbzr qnlf ner GJB OVGR qnlf ...
%
Yvsr vf univat n zbgure-va-ynj gung fhpxf naq n jvsr gung qba'g.
		-- Ebqarl Qnatresvryq
%
Yvsr vf yvxr n phphzore -- 

bar zbzrag vg'f va lbhe unaq, gur arkg vg'f hc lbhe nff.
%
Yvsr vf yvxr n fuvg fnaqjvpu.

Gur zber oernq lbh unir, gur yrff fuvg lbh unir gb rng.
%
Yvsr vf abg n pnonerg.
Vg'f n shpxvat pvephf.
%
Yvsr vfa'g n ovgpu.  Yvsr vf n ivetva.  N ovgpu vf rnfl.
%
Ybbx bhg sbe lbhefrys -- be gurl'yy crr ba lbhe tenir.
		-- Ybhvf O. Znlre

Gur ernfba fb znal crbcyr fubjrq hc ng Ybhvf O. Znlre'f shareny jnf orpnhfr
gurl jnagrq gb znxr fher ur jnf qrnq.
		-- Fnzhry Tbyqjla
%
Ybir vf n fyvccrel rry gung ovgrf yvxr uryy.
		-- Zngg Tebravat
%
Znal n zna unf qrpvqrq gb fgnl nyvir abg orpnhfr bs gur jvyy gb yvir, ohg
orpnhfr bs gur qrgrezvangvba abg gb tvir nffbegrq fheivivat onfgneqf gur
fngvfsnpgvba bs uvf qrngu.
		-- Oeraqna Senapvf
%
	ZpDhvyyna jnf ba gur fgnaq. Gur pnfr vaibyirq n envyebnq naq frireny bs
gur cnffratref jub jrer vawherq.
	"Lbh fnl," guhaqrerq gur pbhafry sbe gur envyebnq, "gung lbh fnj
gur gjb genvaf penfu urnq ba juvyr qbvat fvkgl zvyrf na ubhe.  Jung qvq lbh
guvax jura lbh fnj guvf unccra ?"
	V gubhtug," ercyvrq gur Vevfuzna, "guvf vf bar *uryyhin* jnl gb eha
n envyebnq."
%
Zr, V ybir gur evpu.  *Fbzrobql* unf gb ybir gurz.  Fher, n ybg bs evpu
crbcyr ner nffubyrf, ohg oryvrir zr, n ybg bs cbbe crbcyr ner nffubyrf gbb.
Naq na nffubyr jvgu zbarl pna ng yrnfg cnl sbe uvf bja qevaxf.
		-- Gbz Eboovaf, "Wvggreoht Creshzr"
%
Zrtngba Zna:	"YBBX ng gurz!  Urycyrff, graqre perngherf, erylvat ba
		ZR, jnvgvat sbe ZR gb znxr zl zbir!"

(sebz orybj):	"Zbir lbhe NFF, Sng-urnq!"

Zrtngba Zna:	"Vg vf n ZNAQNGR, naq V nz QHGL OBHAQ gb BORL!"
%
Zbbql ovgpu va frnepu bs...
	xvaq, pbafvqrengr, ybivat zna.  Bowrpgvir, ybir-ungr eryngvbafuvc.
%
Zbbql ovgpu jvgu nggvghqr, frrxf avpr, tbbq-ybbxvat thl gb qhzc ba.
%
Zbfg crbcyr jbhyqa'g xabj zhfvp vs vg pnzr hc naq ovg gurz ba gur nff.
		-- Senax Mnccn
%
Zl nqivpr gb gur jbzra'f pyhof bs Nzrevpn vf gb envfr zber uryy naq srjre
qnuyvnf.
		-- Jvyyvnz Nyyra Juvgr
%
Zl oebgure-va-ynj unf sbhaq n jnl gb znxr raqf zrrg.  Ur tbrf nebhaq
jvgu uvf urnq fghpx hc uvf nff.
%
Arire syl haqre n frnthyy - gurl'yy fuvg ba lbhe nvecynar.
		-- Tbeqba Pbbcre
%
	"Arire fraq n ZNA gb qb n JBZNA'F jbex!  Jul qb lbh guvax V PNZR urer?"
	"Abg sbe gur tbbq bs zl rtb, gung jnf sbe qnza fher."
%
Ab znggre ubj pyrire gur uneqjner oblf ner, gur fbsgjner oblf cvff vg njnl.
%
Aba Vyyrtvgvzhf Pneobehaqhz.
	[Qba'g yrg gur onfgneqf jrne lbh qbja.]
%
Bofprar?  Bofprar vf lbhat zra orvat genvarq gb qebc sver ba crbcyr, ohg
gurve pbzznaqref abg nyybjvat gurz gb jevgr "shpx" ba gurve nvecynarf
orpnhfr vg'f bofprar.
%
Bofpravgl vf gur pehgpu bs vanegvphyngr zbgureshpxref.
%
Byq zrepranevrf arire qvr.  Gurl tb gb uryy naq ertebhc.
%
	Ba gur qnl bs uvf naavirefnel, Wbr jnf senagvpnyyl fubccvat
nebhaq sbe n cerfrag sbe uvf jvsr.  Ur xarj jung fur jnagrq, n
tenaqsngure pybpx sbe gur yvivat ebbz, ohg ur sbhaq gur evtug bar nyzbfg
vzcbffvoyr gb svaq.  Svanyyl, nsgre znal ubhef bs frnepuvat, Wbr sbhaq
whfg gur pybpx ur jnagrq, ohg gur fgber qvqa'g qryvire.  Wbr, qrfcrengr,
cnvq gur fubcxrrcre, ubvfgrq gur pybpx bagb uvf onpx, naq fgnttrerq bhg
bagb gur fvqrjnyx.  Ba gur jnl ubzr, ur cnffrq n one. Whfg nf ur ernpurq
gur qbbe, n qehax fghzoyrq bhg naq penfurq vagb Wbr, fraqvat uvzfrys,
Wbr, naq gur pybpx vagb gur thggre.  Zhecul'f ynj orvat va rssrpg, gur
pybpx raqrq hc va ebhtuyl n gubhfnaq cvrprf.
	"Lbh fghcvq qehax!" fpernzrq Wbr, whzcvat hc sebz gur jerpxntr.
"Jul qba'g lbh ybbx jurer gur uryy lbh'er tbvat!"
	Jvgu dhvrg qvtavgl gur qehax fgbbq hc fbzrjung hafgrnqvyl naq
qhfgrq uvzfrys bss.  "Naq jul qba'g lbh whfg jrne n jevfgjngpu yvxr n
abezny crefba?"
%
Bapr hcba n gvzr, gurer jnf n aba-pbasbezvat fcneebj jub qrpvqrq abg gb
syl fbhgu sbe gur jvagre.  Ubjrire, fbba nsgre gur jrngure ghearq pbyq,
gur fcneebj punatrq uvf zvaq naq eryhpgnagyl fgnegrq gb syl fbhgu.
Nsgre n fubeg gvzr, vpr ortna gb sbez uvf ba uvf jvatf naq ur sryy gb
rnegu va n onealneq nyzbfg sebmra.  N pbj cnffrq ol naq penccrq ba guvf
yvggyr oveq naq gur fcneebj gubhtug vg jnf gur raq, ohg gur znaher
jnezrq uvz naq qrsebfgrq uvf jvatf.  Jnez naq unccl gur yvggyr fcneebj
ortna gb fvat.  Whfg gura, n ynetr Gbz png pnzr ol naq urnevat gur
puvecvat vairfgvtngrq gur fbhaqf.  Nf Byq Gbz pyrnerq njnl gur znaher,
ur sbhaq gur puvecvat oveq naq cebzcgyl ngr uvz.

Gurer ner guerr zbenyf gb guvf fgbel:

(1) Rirelbar jub fuvgf ba lbh vf abg arprffnevyl lbhe rarzl.
(2) Rirelbar jub trgf lbh bhg bs fuvg vf abg arprffnevyl lbhe sevraq.
(3) Vs lbh ner jnez naq unccl va n cvyr bs fuvg, xrrc lbhe zbhgu fuhg.
%
Bar qnl n yvggyr cbyne orne pho fnlf gb uvf zbgure, "Zbzzl, nz V ernyyl
n cbyne orne?"
	"Jul bs pbhefr lbh ner, ubarl!" uvf zbgure ercyvrf.  "Lbh yvir ng
gur Abegu Cbyr naq lbh fjvz haqre gur vpr gb pngpu svfu.  Lbh cynl ba gur
vpr sybrf naq lbh ebzc guebhtu gur fabj naq punfr frnyf.  Bs *pbhefr* lbh'er
n cbyne orne.  Jul qb lbh nfx?"
	"Orpnhfr," fnlf gur yvggyr pho, "V'z shpxva' serrmvat!"
%
Bhef vf n jbeyq jurer crbcyr qba'g xabj jung gurl jnag naq ner jvyyvat
gb tb guebhtu uryy gb trg vg.
%
Cneqba zr, fve, ohg lbh'ir boivbhfyl zvfgnxra zr sbe fbzrbar jub tvirf n fuvg.
%
Crbcyr jub jevgr cbfvgvba cncref bsgra svaq gurzfryirf va na
raivnoyr cbfvgvba.  Gurl ner uverq gb jevgr cncref sbe obgu fvqrf bs gur
cbfvgvba.
	N tbbq cbfvgvba cncre jvyy unir znal jbeqf va vg yvxr
"fhcrevaphzorapr," "rterff," naq "cyhevsvpngvba."
	Lbh jvyy abg bsgra svaq gur cuenfr "yvtugjrvtug qebcpnfr
yvzc-jevfgrq zbgureshpxre" va n frevbhf cbfvgvba cncre.
	Punegf naq zhygvcyvpngvba gnoyrf fubhyq nyjnlf or vapyhqrq va
cbfvgvba cncref.  Gurl fubhyq ybbx pbzcyvpngrq rabhtu gb znxr Nyoreg
Rvafgrva fgnttre npebff gur ebbz sbe n Glyraby.
	N tbbq cbfvgvba cncre jvyy arire haqrerfgvzngr gur inyhr bs n
frzvpbyba.
		-- Qna Wraxvaf, "Onwn Bxynubzn"
%
Crbcyr jvyy fjvz guebhtu fuvg vs lbh chg n srj obo va vg.
		-- Crgre Fryyref
%
Cflpubgurencl vf gur gurbel gung gur cngvrag jvyy cebonoyl trg jryy nalubj
naq vf pregnvayl n qnza sbby.
		-- U. Y. Zrapxra
%
Fuvg unccraf.
%
	Fubegyl nsgre Puhepuvyy unq tebja n zbhfgnpur, ur jnf nppbfgrq ol n
pregnva lbhat ynql jubfr cbyvgvpny ivrjf jrer va qverpg bccbfvgvba gb uvf
bja.  Snaplvat urefrys fbzrguvat bs n jnt, fur rkpynvzrq, "Ze. Puhepuvyy, V
pner sbe arvgure lbhe cbyvgvpf abe lbhe zbhfgnpur."  Hanonfurq, gur lbhat
fgngrfzna ertneqrq ure dhvrgyl sbe n zbzrag, gur jelyl pbzzragrq, "Fhpx zl
qvpx."
	Juvyr freivat nf n fhonygrea va gur Obre Jne, gur lbhat Puhepuvyy jnf
nfxrq ol n fhcrevbe bssvpre gb tvir uvf bcvavba bs gur Obref nf fbyqvref.
 "Gurl'er nffubyrf, fve," ur iragherq, gura cnhfrq oevrsyl naq nqqrq, jvgu n
juvzfvpny fzvyr, "Gurl'er nffubyrf."
	Puhepuvyy jnf tvira gb ernqvat va gur ongugho naq, juvyr fgnlvat ng
gur Juvgr Ubhfr, ur bapr orpnzr fb ratebffrq va na nppbhag bs gur Onggyr bs
Sbagrarl gung ur sbetbg Cerfvqrag Ebbfriryg jnf qhr gb qebc ol gb qvfphff gur
hcpbzvat pbasrerapr va Lnygn.  Ng gur nccbvagrq ubhe, gur Cerfvqrag jnf
jurryrq vagb Puhepuvyy'f dhnegref bayl gb or vasbezrq gung gur Cevzr Zvavfgre
unq abg svavfurq onguvat.  Ebbfriryg jnf nobhg gb ncbybtvmr sbe gur vagehfvba
naq qrcneg jura Puhepuvyy, chssvat uvf phfgbznel pvtne, fgebqr vagb gur ebbz
fgnex anxrq naq terrgrq gur abacyhffrq jbeyq yrnqre jvgu n grefr, "Jung ner
lbh fgnevat ng, ubzb?"
		-- "Gur Puhepuvyy Jvg", Angvbany Ynzcbba
%
Fvyrapr pna or gur ovttrfg yvr bs nyy.  Jr unir n erfcbafvovyvgl gb fcrnx
hc; naq jurarire gur bppnfvba pnyyf sbe vg, jr unir n erfcbafvovyvgl gb
envfr oybbql uryy.
		-- Ureoreg Oybpx
%
Fb lbh shpxrq hc... lbh gehfgrq hf!
		-- Navzny Ubhfr
%
Fbzr pbzcnavrf vqrn bs cynlvat onyy vf, lbh cynl onyy jvgu hf,
naq jr'yy fgvpx gur shpxvat ong hc lbhe nff.
%
Fbzr bs gur znantrzrag nebhaq urer ner gur svany cebbs gung gur Vaqvnaf
shpxrq gur ohssnyb.
%
Fbzrgvzrf, lbh whfg tbggn fnl "Jung gur shpx."
		-- Evfxl Ohfvarff
%
Fhofgvghgr 'qnza' rirel gvzr lbh'er vapyvarq gb jevgr 'irel'; lbhe
rqvgbe jvyy qryrgr vg naq gur jevgvat jvyy or whfg nf vg fubhyq or.
		-- Znex Gjnva
%
Fhpprff unf znal snguref, ohg snvyher vf n onfgneq.
%
Gryy lbh jung," gur unoreqnfure fnvq gb n crefvfgrag wbo nccyvpnag.  "V'ir
tbg bar fhvg V pna'g fryy -- gung checyr, terra naq lryybj ahzore bire gurer.
Vs lbh pna znxr gung fnyr, lbh'ir abg bayl tbg gur wbo, lbh'ir tbg vg sbe
yvsr."
	Gura gur fgber bjare yrsg sbe yhapu.  Jura ur erghearq, ur jnf fubpxrq
gb frr gur lbhat zna'f pybgurf va gnggref naq uvf unaqf naq snpr oyrrqvat.
	"Zl Tbq, jung unccrarq gb lbh?"
	"V fbyq gur fhvg!  V fbyq gur fhvg!" gur lbhat zna fubhgrq, n fzvyr
ba uvf oybbqvrq yvcf.
	"Pbatenghyngvbaf," gur unoreqnfure fnvq.  "Lbh'ir tbg gur wbo.  Ohg
jung unccrarq?  Qvq gur phfgbzre fgneg n svtug?"
	"Bu, ab," gur arj fnyrfzna ercyvrq.  "Ohg uvf Frrvat Rlr qbt jnf
*cvffrq*."
%
Gur orfg ahzore sbe n qvaare cnegl vf gjb--zlfrys naq n qnza tbbq urnq jnvgre.
		-- Ahone Thyoraxvna
%
Gur oblf va gur Rccrefba snzvyl nyy npdhverq svar rqhpngvbaf rkprcg sbe Rqjneq.
Gurl znqr uvz tb gb fpubby, ohg zbfg bs gur gvzr ur whfg vtaberq jung jnf fnvq
gurer.  Lrg gurer jrer ener zbzragf jura ur pbhyq qvfcynl n ovg bs phevbfvgl.
	Bar qnl Rqjneq jnf fvggvat ng ubzr ybbxvat ng n zntnmvar, naq ur fnvq
gb uvf oevyyvnag byqre oebgure, Uhq, ur fnvq, "Uhq, jung qbrf sbk cnff zrna?"
	Oebgure Uhq tnir gur dhrfgvba fbzr qrrc pbafvqrengvba naq gura fnvq,
"Lbh zhfg zrna _snhk_cnf_."
	"Gur jnl vg'f fcryyrq," fnvq qhzo Rq, "vg'f sbk cnff."
	Uhq gbbx n ybbx ng gur jnl vg jnf fcryyrq naq gura fnvq, "Vg'f n Serapu
cuenfr -- vg zrnaf n fbpvny oyhaqre.  Erzrzore ynfg Fhaqnl jura gur Ovfubc pnzr
sbe qvaare?  Zbgure gbbx uvz bhg va gur tneqra naq gurl jrer ybbxvat bire gur
ebfrf jura gur Ovfubc tbg fghpx ba gur guhzo ol n gubea.  Vg jnf oyrrqvat dhvgr
n ovg fb Zbgure oebhtug uvz va gur ubhfr.  Gurl jrag vagb gur onguebbz gbtrgure
naq fgnlrq dhvgr n juvyr, naq jura gurl pnzr bhg jr nyy jrag gb gur qvaare
gnoyr.  Erzrzore nyy gung, Rq?"
	"Lru."
	"Abj," Uhq pbagvahrq, "lbh erpnyy gung V jnf whfg trggvat gb cnff
gur tenil jura Zbgure fnvq, 'Ovfubc, qbrf lbhe cevpx fgvyy guebo?'  Gur tenil
objy syrj bhg bs zl unaqf naq uvg gur gnoyr, naq gur tenil fcynggrerq nyy
bire rirelbar.  Naq whfg ng gung cbvag lbh, Oebgure Rqjneq, lbh ubyyrerq,
'Furrr-vgg!'  Lbh erzrzore gung?"
	"Lru."
	"Jryy, jura lbh ubyyrerq 'Furrr-vgg!' gung jnf n _snhk_cnf_."
%
Gur qvssrerapr orgjrra tenssvgv naq cuvybfbcul vf gur jbeq "shpx".
%
	Gur snzbhf Aryy Tjlaa, fgrccvat bar qnl sebz n ubhfr jurer fur unq
znqr n fubeg ivfvg vagb ure pbnpu, fnj n terng pebjq nffrzoyrq, naq ure
sbbgzna nyy oybbql naq qvegl; gur sryybj orvat nfxrq ol uvf zvfgerff, gur
ernfba sbe uvf orvat va gung pbaqvgvba, nafjrerq, "V unir orra svtugvat,
znqnz, jvgu na vzchqrag enfpny jub pnyyrq lbhe ynqlfuvc n juber."
	"Lbh oybpxurnq," ercyvrq Zef. Tljaa, "ng guvf engr lbh zhfg svtug
rirel qnl bs lbhe yvsr; jul, lbh sbby, nyy gur jbeyq xabjf vg."
	"Qb gurl?" pevrf gur sryybj, va n zhggrevat ibvpr, nsgre ur unq fuhg
gur pbnpu qbbe, "gurl funa'g pnyy zr n juber'f sbbgzna sbe nyy gung."
		-- Urael Svryqvat, "Gbz Wbarf"
%
Gur tbireazrag jnf pbagrzcyngvat gur qvfcngpu bs na rkcrqvgvba gb Ohezn,
jvgu n ivrj gb gnxvat Enatbba, naq n dhrfgvba nebfr nf gb jub jbhyq or gur
svggrfg trareny gb or frag va pbzznaq bs gur rkcrqvgvba.  Gur Pnovarg frag
sbe gur Qhxr bs Jryyvatgba, naq nfxrq uvf nqivpr.  Ur vafgnagyl ercyvrq,
"Fraq Ybeq Pbzorezrer."
	"Ohg jr unir nyjnlf haqrefgbbq gung lbhe Tenpr gubhtug Ybeq
Pbzorezrer n sbby."
	"Fb ur vf n sbby, naq n qnzarq sbby; ohg ur pna gnxr Enatbba."
		-- T.J.R. Ehffryy
%
Gur uvture lbh pyvzo, gur zber lbh fubj lbhe nff.
		-- Nyrknaqre Cbcr, "Gur Qhapvnq"
%
Gur zber penc lbh chg hc jvgu, gur zber penc lbh'er tbvat gb trg.
%
... gur zbfg rkdhvfvgryl fdhnyvq uryyf xabja gb zvqqyr-pynff zna:
serfuzna Ratyvfu ng n Zvqjrfgrea havirefvgl.
		-- Gbz Jbysr
%
Gur bowrpgvir bs nyy qrqvpngrq rzcyblrrf fubhyq or gb gubebhtuyl nanylmr
nyy fvghngvbaf, nagvpvcngr nyy ceboyrzf cevbe gb gurve bppheerapr, unir
nafjref sbe gurfr ceboyrzf, naq zbir fjvsgyl gb fbyir gurfr ceboyrzf
jura pnyyrq hcba.
	Ubjrire...
Jura lbh ner hc gb lbhe nff va nyyvtngbef vg vf qvssvphyg gb erzvaq
lbhefrys lbhe vavgvny bowrpgvir jnf gb qenva gur fjnzc.
%
Gur byq zna unq yvirq nyy uvf yvsr va n yvggyr ubhfr ba gur Irezbag fvqr bs gur
Arj Unzcfuver-Irezbag obeqre.  Bar qnl, gur fheirlbef pnzr gb vasbez uvz gung
gurl unq whfg qvfpbirerq gung ur yvirq va Arj Unzcfuver, abg Irezbag.
	"Gunax urniraf!" jnf uvf urnegsryg ercyl.  "V qba'g guvax V pbhyq unir
gnxra nabgure bar bs gubfr qnzarq Irezbag jvagref!"
%
Gur bayl guvat snfgre guna gur fcrrq bs yvtug vf fuvg sybjvat qbjauvyy.
		-- Zvxr B'Qryy
%
Gur bayl jnl lbh'yy rire urne sebz zr vf vs lbh'er yvivat va gur fnzr uryy.
		-- Ebl Unecre
%
Gur ebnq gb uryy vf cnirq jvgu tbbq vagragvbaf.  Naq yvggrerq jvgu
fybccl nanylfvf!
%
	GUR GRA FGNTRF BS VAGBKVPNGVBA

	 (1) JVGGL NAQ PUNEZVAT: Guvf vf nsgre bar be gjb qevaxf.  Gur gbathr
	     vf ybbfrarq naq pna lrg erznva va fgrc jvgu gur oenva.  Va gur
	     "jvggl naq punezvat" fgngr, bar vf yvxryl gb hfr sbervta vqvbzf
	     naq cuenfrf fhpu nf "nh pbagenver" va cynpr bs "Abj jnl, Wbfr,"
	     be "Ohyyfurlrg".
	 (2) EVPU NAQ CBJRESHY: Ol gur guveq qevax, lbh ortva zragvbavat gur
	     yvggyr 380 FY lbh'ir unq lbhe rlr ba qbja ng gur Zreprqrf cynpr.
	 (3) ORARIBYRAG:  Lbh'yy ohl ure n Zreprqrf, gbb.  Vg'f bayl zbarl.
	 (4) WHFG BAR ZBER NAQ GURA JR'YY RNG:  Fgnyy gnpgvp.
	 (5) GB URYY JVGU QVAARE:  Whfg bar zber naq gura jr'yy rng.
	 (6) CNGEVBGVP:  Gur jne fgbevrf ortva.
	 (7) PENAX HC GUR "RABYN TNL":  "Jr pbhyq unir jba va Anz, ohg..."
	 (8) VAIVFVOYR:  Fb guvf vf jung gur Ynqvrf' Ebbz ybbxf yvxr.
	 (9) JVGGL NAQ PUNEZVAT CNEG VV: Lbh xabj, lbh qba'g fjrng zhpu sbe
	     n sng tvey.
	(10) OHYYRGCEBBS:  Ohyy-furlrg, tvzzr gurz xrlf, V pna qevir.
		-- Yrjvf Tevmmneq, "Zl Qnqql Jnf n Cvfgby naq V'z n Fba
		   bs n Tha".
%
Gur gvzr unf pbzr sbe xvpxvat nff naq gnxvat anzrf.
%
	Gur gbjafcrbcyr fgbbq va qrfcnve nf gur sver gung unq ortha va n qvare
guerngrarq gb fcernq gb nqwbvavat ubzrf.  Whfg gura, n gehpx svyyrq jvgu
snez jbexref pnzr fcrrqvat qbja n uvyy gbjneq gur sver.  Gur pebjq zbirq
onpx naq gur gehpx qebir evtug vagb gur guvpxrfg bs gur synzrf.  Gur jbexref
whzcrq bhg naq orng ng gur sver jvgu gurve pbngf, zvenphybhfyl oevatvat gur
oynmr haqre pbageby.
	Gur pvgl snguref jrer fb tengrshy sbe gur zra'f urebvfz gung gurl
tnir rnpu n cyndhr naq $1000.  Nsgre gur prerzbal, arjfzra vagreivrjrq gur
qevire naq nfxrq uvz jung ur jnf tbvat gb qb jvgu gur zbarl.
	"Lbh pna or qnzarq fher gur svefg guvat V'z tbaan qb," ur ercyvrq,
"vf trg gur oenxrf svkrq ba gung fba-bs-n-ovgpuva' gehpx!"
%
Gur jbeyq vf na 8000 zvyr va qvnzrgre fcurevpny cvyr bs fuvg.
%
Gurer ner guerr xvaqf bs yvrf: yvrf, qnzarq yvrf naq fgngvfgvpf.
		-- Orawnzva Qvfenryv
%
Gurer ner gjb fvqrf gb rirel qvibepr: lbhef naq gur fuvgurnq'f.
%
Gurer vf nyjnlf zber uryy gung arrqf envfvat.
		-- Ynhera Yrirhg
%
Gurer'f n zna qrrcyl va qrog, frr, naq ur gnxrf gur zbarl ur unf yrsg
naq tbrf gb Zbagr Pneyb gb gel gb erpbhc ng gur ebhyrggr gnoyrf.  Jba n
yvggyr, ybfg n ybg, naq jnf qbja gb uvf ynfg senap.  Cenlrq sbe uryc.
N ibvpr juvfcrerq va uvf rne: "Yr ebhtr..."   Zna ybbxrq nebhaq; abobql
gurer.  Jung gur uryy -- ur chgf uvf ynfg senap ba gur erq, naq vg jba.
Gur ibvpr vzzrqvngryl fnvq, "Rapber yr ebhtr..."  Cynlrq erq ntnva, naq
vg jba ntnva.  Gur ibvpr fnvq, "Vzcnve..."  Cynlrq bqq, naq vg jba.  Ibvpr
fnvq, "Dhvamr..." fb ur chg nyy gur zbarl ba 15, naq vg jba.  Guvf jrag
ba sbe ubhef, gur ibvpr gryyvat uvz jung gb org, naq gur zna chggvat nyy
uvf zbarl ba jung gur ibvpr fnvq, naq jvaavat.  Svanyyl jura gur ibvpr
fcbxr, gur zna cebgrfgrq gung ur'q jba zvyyvbaf bs qbyynef naq jnagrq gb
dhvg.  Gur ibvpr jnf varkbenoyr: "Qbhmr..."  Gur zna chg gur zbarl ba 12,
naq 11 pnzr hc -- ur unq ybfg rirelguvat -- gur ibvpr zhezherq "Zreqr!!"
%
Gurer'f n graqrapl gbqnl gb nofbyir vaqvivqhnyf sebz zbeny erfcbafvovyvgl naq
gerng gurz nf ivpgvzf bs fbpvny pvephzfgnapr.  Lbh ohl gung, lbh cnl jvgu lbhe
fbhy.  Vg'f abg zra jub yvzvg jbzra, vg'f abg fgenvtugf jub yvzvg tnlf, vg'f
abg juvgrf jub yvzvg oynpxf.  Jung yvzvgf crbcyr vf ynpx bs punenpgre.  Jung
yvzvgf crbcyr vf gung gurl qba'g unir gur shpxvat areir be vzntvangvba gb fgne
va gurve bja zbivr, yrg nybar qverpg vg.
		-- Oreaneq Zvpxrl Jenatyr
%
Gurl bhtug gb znxr ohgg-syniberq png sbbq.
		-- Tnyynture
%
Guvf thl znxrf na nccbvagzrag jvgu n qbpgbe orpnhfr uvf urzbeeubvqf ner
ernyyl obgurevat uvz.  Gur qbpgbe tvirf uvz fbzr fhccbfvgbevrf naq gryyf
uvz gb pbzr onpx va n jrrx sbe n purpxhc.  "Ubj'f vg tbvat?" ur nfxf
gur cngvrag n jrrx yngre.
	"V tbggn gryy lbh gur gehgu, Qbp," fnvq gur zna.  "Sbe nyy gur
tbbq gurfr cvyyf qvq zr, V pbhyqn fubirq gurz hc zl nff."
%
Guvf thl jnyxf vagb n onax naq hc gb n srznyr onax gryyre:

Zna:	"V jnag gb bcra n shpxva' fnivatf nppbhag."
Gryyre:	"Rkphfr zr, fve?"
Z:	"Yvfgra, ovgpu, V jnag gb bcra n shpxva' fnivatf nppbhag."
G:	"Fve, V qba'g unir gb yvfgra gb guvf nohfvir ynathntr."
Z:	"YBBX!  V whfg jnag gb bcra n shpxva' fnivatf nppbhag."
G:	"Fve, lbh yrnir zr ab pubvpr ohg gb fcrnx gb gur znantre."

Gur gryyre jnyxf bire naq rkcynvaf gur phfgbzre'f ehqr orunivbe gb gur onax
znantre jub gura nppbzcnavrf ure onpx gb gur gryyre obbgu.

Zte:	"Pna V uryc lbh, fve?"
Z:	"V jnag gb bcra n shpxva' fnivatf nppbhag."
Zte:	"Cyrnfr, fve, jr'yy or qryvtugrq gb uryc lbh, ohg jr zhfg erdhrfg
	gung lbh abg hfr nohfvir ynathntr gb bhe gryyref."
Z:	"Ybbx. V whfg jba $25 zvyyvba va gur fgngr ybggrel naq V jnag gb
	bcra n shpxva' fnivatf nppbhag!"
Zte:	"V frr.  Naq unf guvf phag orra tvivat lbh nal gebhoyr?"
%
Guvf vf Angvbany Fzbxref-Ner-Fuvgf Jrrx.
%
Gbqnl vf tbaan or bar uryyhin jrrx!
%
Gbzbeebj arire pbzrf!  Vg'f nyy gur fnzr shpxva' qnl, zna!
		-- Wnavf Wbcyva
%
	Gjb yvggyr xvqf, ntrq fvk naq rvtug, qrpvqr vg'f gvzr gb yrnea ubj gb
fjrne. Fb, gur rvtug-lrne-byq fnlf gb gur fvk-lrne-byq, "Bxnl, lbh fnl
`nff' naq V'yy fnl `uryy'".
	Nyy rkpvgrq nobhg gurve cyna, gurl gebbc qbjafgnvef, jurer gurve
zbgure nfxf gurz jung gurl'q yvxr sbe oernxsnfg.
	"Nj, uryy," fnlf gur rvtug-lrne-byq, "tvzzr fbzr Purrevbf." Uvf zbgure
onpxunaqf uvz bss gur fgbby, fraqvat uvz onjyvat bhg bs gur ebbz, naq
gheaf gb gur lbhatre oebgure.  "Jung'yy lbh unir?"
	"V qhaab," dhniref gur fvk-lrne-byq, "ohg lbh pna org lbhe nff vg
nva'g tbaan or Purrevbf."
%
Gjb zbegvpvnaf nygreangrq va funevat gur erfcbafvovyvgl bs pbirevat 
gur avtug fuvsg. Bar rneyl zbeavat nobhg 3:00 nz, n obql jnf oebhtug vagb gur 
zbeghnel, naq gur zbegvpvna ortna jbex.  Jura ur unq hapybgurq gur pbecfr, ur 
abgvprq n pbex va gur nahf. Erzbivat vg, gur fgenvaf bs "Uryyb, Qbyyl, jryy, 
uryyb, Qbyyl...!" jrer cynvayl urneq orvat fhat.  Ur chg gur pbex onpx, naq 
gur fvatvat fgbccrq. Chyyvat vg bhg ntnva, gur fnzr fbat fgnegrq, "Lbh'er 
ybbxva' fjryy, Qbyyl!".  Nznmrq, ur gryrcubarq uvf cnegare, naq vafvfgrq ur 
pbzr vzzrqvngryl gb frr fbzrguvat irel hahfhny. Ebhfrq sebz fyrrc, gur cnegare
nfxrq vs vg pbhyq jnvg hagvy zbeavat. Vg gbbx terng crefvfgrapr, ohg svanyyl 
gur cnegare nterrq gb qerff naq pbzr qbja gb gur fubc.  Jura ur tbg gurer, ur 
fnvq, "Abj jung jnf vg gung jnf fb vzcbegnag lbh unq gb trg zr bhg bs orq ng 
guvf hatbqyl ubhe?" 
	Gur zna fnvq, "Pbzr vagb gur rzonyzvat ebbz."
	Gurl tb vagb gur rzonyzvat ebbz, naq gur svefg cnegare fnlf, "Abj 
jngpu."
	Ur chyyf bhg gur pbex, naq gur nahf gnxrf bss fvatvat ntnva. Gur
cnegare ybbxf ng uvz qvfthfgrqyl naq fnlf:  "Lbh oebhtug zr qbja urer ng
guerr va gur zbeavat whfg gb urne fbzr nffubyr fvat Uryyb Qbyyl"?
%
ILNEMREMBZNAVZBEBEFRMNFFRMNAFRENERBEFRF?
%
"Jngre?  Arire gbhpu gur fghss!  Svfu shpx va vg."
		-- J. P. Svryqf
%
Jr nera'g jung jr rng.  Jr ner jung jr qba'g fuvg.
		-- Uhtu Ebzarl
%
Jr pnyy bhe qbt Rtlcg, orpnhfr va rirel ebbz ur yrnirf n clenzvq.
%
Jr pnzr, jr fnj, jr xvpxrq vgf nff!
		-- Ovyy Zheenl, "Tubfgohfgref"
%
Jr zhfg erzrzore gur Svefg Nzraqzrag juvpu cebgrpgf nal fuevyy wnpxnff
ab znggre ubj frys-frrxvat.
		-- S. T. Jvguvatgba
%
Jryy, abj gung FHA'f va orq jvgu NG&G, V fher ubcr fur fyrrcf jvgu ure
onpx gb gur jnyy.
		-- Thl Uneevf, ba NG&G ohlvat 20% bs FHA Zvpebflfgrzf

Rng fuvg naq qvr.  Fgebat zrzb gb sbyybj.
		-- Zvxr B'Qryy, ba NG&G ohlvat 20% bs FHA Zvpebflfgrzf
%
	Jryy, gurer jnf guvf gvtre, jub jbxr hc bar zbeavat, naq whfg sryg
terng (lrf, whfg yvxr Gbal gur Gvtre: TERNNNNNNG).  Naljnl, ur whfg sryg
fb tbbq, ur jrag bhg naq pbearerq n fznyy zbaxrl naq ebnerq ng uvz: "JUB VF
GUR ZVTUGVRFG BS NYY GUR WHATYR NAVZNYF?"
	Naq guvf cbbe dhnxvat yvggyr zbaxrl ercyvrq: "Lbh ner bs pbhefr, ab
bar vf zvtugvre guna lbh."
	N yvggyr juvyr yngre guvf gvtre pbasebagf n qrre, naq whfg oryybjf bhg:
"JUB VF GUR TERNGRFG NAQ FGEBATRFG BS NYY GUR WHATYR NAVZNYF?"
	Gur qrre vf funxvat fb uneq vg pna oneryl fcrnx, ohg znantrf gb
fgnzzre: "Bu terng gvtre, lbh ner ol sne gur zvtugvrfg navzny va gur whatyr."
	Gur gvtre, orvat ba n ebyy, fjnttrerq, hc gb na ryrcunag gung jnf
dhvrgyl zhapuvat ba fbzr jrrqf, naq ebnerq ng gur gbc bs uvf ibvpr: "JUB VF
GUR ZVTUGVRFG BS NYY GUR NAVZNYF VA GUR WHATYR?"
	Jryy, guvf ryrcunag tenof gur gvtre jvgu uvf gehax, cvpxf uvz hc, fynzf
uvz qbja; cvpxf uvz hc ntnva, naq funxrf uvz hagvy gur gvtre vf whfg n oyhe bs
benatr naq oynpx; naq svanyyl guebjf uvz ivbyragyl vagb n arneol gerr.
	Gur gvtre fgnttref gb uvf srrg, ybbxf ng gur ryrcunag naq fnlf: "Zna,
lbh qba'g unir gb trg fb cvffrq, whfg orpnhfr lbh qba'g xabj gur nafjre!"
%
Jryy, guvf jbzna jrag gb gur ohgpure fubc gb trg fbzr unz sbe qvaare.
Fur nfxrq gur ohgpure jung xvaq bs unz ur erpbzzraqrq, naq gur ohgpure fnvq,
"Jryy zn'nz, jr tbg fbzr Qnza unz urer sbe $3.50 n cbhaq..."  Arrqyrff gb
fnl, fur jnf fhecevfrq ng gur ohgpure'f ynathntr!  Gur ohgpure, jub jnf
ernfbanoyl nfghgr, abgvprq gur nynezrq ybbx ba gur jbzna'f snpr, naq dhvpxyl
whfgvsvrq uvzfrys.  "Ab, ab, zn'nz, V jnfa'g phefva', gur ANZR bs guvf urer
unz vf "Qnza unz".  Nzhfrq, gur jbzna erdhrfgrq fbzr "Qnza unz."
	Gung avtug, orsber qvaare, gur jbzna gbbx ure uhfonaq nfvqr naq
rkcynvarq jung unq unccrarq ng gur ohgpure fubc.  Ur nyfb jnf nzhfrq, naq
fhttrfgrq gung gurl cynl n wbxr ba gurve fba.  Fb, ng qvaare, nsgre tenpr,
gur zna ghearq gb uvf jvsr naq fnvq, "Ubarl, cnff gur qnza unz."
	Gurve fba ybbxrq hc, fhecevfrq.  "JUBNU!  Qnq or trggva' uvc!
Ubj 'obhg gurz zbgure-shpxva' cbgngbrf?"
%
Jung gur shpx, bire?
%
Jung gur uryy, tb nurnq naq chg nyy lbhe rttf va bar onfxrg.
%
Jura gur fuvg uvgf gur sna, xrrc lbhe zbhgu fuhg!
%
Jurer gur uryy vf Jnyy Qeht?
%
Jub gur uryy jnagf gb urne npgbef gnyx?
		-- Uneel Jneare, Jneare Oebf. Cvpgherf, p. 1927
%
Jub gbbx gur ZZZZZZ bhg bs ZHEVAR?
%
Jul qbrfa'g rirelobql yrnir rirelobql ryfr gur uryy nybar?
		-- Wvzzl Qhenagr
%
Jvaavat vfa'g rirelguvat, ohg ybfvat ernyyl fhpxf.
%
Jvagre vf angher'f jnl bs fnlvat, "Hc lbhef."
		-- Eboreg Olear
%
Jbex yvxr uryy, gryy rirelbar rirelguvat lbh xabj, pybfr n qrny jvgu
n unaqfunxr, naq unir sha.
		-- Unebyq "Qbp" Rqtregba, fhzzvat hc uvf yvsr'f cuvybfbcul,
		   fubegyl orsber qlvat ng gur ntr bs 86.
%
Jbhyq lbh zvaq greevoyl zhpu vs V nfxrq lbh gb gnxr lbhe fvyyl-nffrq
ceboyrz qbja gur unyy?
%
Lrfgreqnl vf n zrzbel,
	Gbzbeebj vf n ivfvba,
		Gbqnl vf n ovgpu!
%
Lbh ner jvgubhg n qbhog n ebthr, n enfpny, n ivyynva, n guvrs, n fpbhaqery,
naq n zrna, qvegl, fgvaxvat, faviryvat, farnxvat, cvzcvat, cbpxrgcvpxvat,
guevpr qbhoyr-qnzarq, ab-tbbq fba-bs-n-ovgpu.
%
Lbh pna svaq flzcngul, va gur qvpgvbanel, evtug arne fuvg naq fhvpvqr.
%
Lbh pna yrnq n juber gb Inffre, ohg lbh pna'g znxr ure guvax.
		-- Serqrevpx O. Negm
%
Lbh unir orra ovgpul fvapr Ghrfqnl naq lbh'yy cebonoyl trg sverq gbqnl.
%
Lbh unir gb or n onfgneq gb znxr vg, naq gung'f n snpg.  Naq gur Orngyrf
ner gur ovttrfg onfgneqf ba rnegu.
		-- Wbua Yraaba
%
"Lbh unir gb ertneq rirelguvat V fnl jvgu fhfcvpvba -- V znl or gelvat
gb ohyyfuvg lbh, be V znl whfg or ohyyfuvggvat lbh vanqiregragyl."
		-- W. Jnvajevtug, Zngurzngvpf 140o
%
Lbh znl abg or noyr gb whqtr n obbx ol vgf pbire, ohg lbh fher nf uryy pna
gryy ubj zhpu vg'f tbvat gb pbfg.
%
Lbh frr gung shpxvat svfu?  Vs ur'q xrcg uvf zbhgu fuhg, ur jbhyqa'gn tbg
pnhtug.
		-- Fnz Tvnapnan
%
Lbh fubhyq or n urzbeeubvq, lbh'er fhpu n cnva va gur nff.
%
